Aberdeen City Council
Energy and Climate Plan ‘Routemap’ 
Executive summary 
We have legal duties  as well as financial and societal imperatives to act robustly  on 
climate change. The Climate Change (Scotland)  Act 2009 set  our initial legal 
framework for this. We are required  to reduce our climate emissions  and raise  our 
climate resilience  in the way we design, build  and manage  our operations and 
assets. A 2019  Act introduces a Scottish net zero emissions target by 2045 and 
requires the strengthening of our ambitions and actions to address climate change. 
We were the first Council in Scotland to produce a Climate  Change Action  Plan in 
2002 and have taken  several important steps since then. The purpose of  this 
proposed Routemap is to outline  our next steps  and timetable in our climate journey;  
to develop and deliver a new Council Energy and Climate Plan covering our  estate 
and operations. The resulting Plan will set out the contexts,  our commitments, 
approach and actions  for substantially  reducing  our emissions, managing  our risks  
and delivering across a range of outcome areas. 
Our next stage in our journey, our transformation to a net zero and  climate resilient 
council, will affect  every  part of our organisation, requiring a raising of ambition, an 
acceleration in change and a smart, coordinated,  different ways of doing  things.   
Our commitment
Our context
The Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009  set climate  change duties for public 
bodies, including:  contributing to the delivery  of national emission targets;  
helping to deliver the national adaptation programme;  and reporting annually.
Evidence  of the growing pace and severity  of climate  change today  has resulted  
in a seismic shift of public and political opinion on this issue, resulting in renewed 
legislation, policies,  actions and funding at all levels.    
The Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2019  has increased  Scotland’s emission 
targets to net zero by 2045.  Government consultation on  the Role  of Public 
Bodies in tackling  Climate Change indicates the public sector should  be more 
ambitious in setting their own targets.We will be an exemplar for net zero and climate resilience, developing a 
comprehensive Energy  and Climate Plan in year 2020/21. It will set: our year for 
zero direct  climate emissions; targets  to reduce  our indirect  climate  emissions; 
and our measures to manage  the climate  risks to our estate  and operations.
2Scotland’s  Climate Change Plan is being  updated to drive  strengthened climate  
action across  sectors – this was expected at the start  of 2020/21. 
Action under this proposed Routemap supports delivery of Aberdeen’s Local  
Outcome Improvement  Plan, especially Stretch outcome 14 – “Addressing 
climate change by reducing Aberdeen's carbon emissions and adapting to the 
impacts of our changing climate.”
Renewed  focus and increased  action  offer opportunities to better manage our  
climate risks,  build our resilience, reduce  our costs,  seek further investment and 
build in co-benefits  across a range  of our statutory and local  priorities.
This also presents us with the opportunity to better align with  and deliver across 
a range  of Sustainable Development Goals  in our stewardship role of our  local 
and global community. 
Our role
Our overall  role is two-fold: 
To govern, shape and manage a sustainable organisation,  delivering diverse  
public services  to the citizens, businesses  and communities of Aberdeen;  and
To help shape, influence and at times deliver  on wider place-based agendas.
This proposed Routemap and subsequent Plan will focus predominantly on  areas 
under our immediate control as an organisation. It will align with statutory 
expectations and local imperatives, building  on, strengthening, better aligning and  
prioritising the many  good initiatives already taking place. 
It will also align  with, while remain  distinct from, associated citywide  energy, climate 
and other relevant strategies and plans.
Areas we directly control
Areas we enable through plans,  policies  & strategies
Our sphere  of influence in the wider city
Our sphere  of influence beyond  the city
Examples of our relevant Council and city / region strategies, policies  and plans.
Council City/ Region
City wideCouncil Energy and 
Climate Plan3Building Performance 
PolicyPowering Aberdeen Sustainable Urban  
Mobility Plan
Travel Policy Aberdeen Adapts Open Space  Strategy
Fleet Asset Management 
PlanLocal Development  Plan Nature Conservation  
Strategy
Property Asset 
Management PlanLocal Housing  Strategy Hydrogen Economy 
Strategy
Internal Waste  
Minimisation PolicyLocal Transport Strategy Regional Economic 
Strategy
Council Delivery Plan Regional Transport 
StrategyNorth East Flood Risk 
Management Plan
The Routemap
Our proposed Routemap is set out in a series  of overlapping  phases, as below:   
Phase 1 – Initiate: by May 2020 - agree a ‘Routemap’  
We propose  to develop and adopt  a Routemap which sets out the journey to  
successful development and delivery of a Council Energy and Climate Plan.
Officers from across relevant clusters, including corporate ones such as Finance and 
People & Organisation, will provide an oversight, facilitation and liaison  role; setting 
direction, facilitating the flow  information and resources,  agreeing  priorities and 
programmes for the ultimate successful development  of the Plan.  
A series of thematic groups are proposed to lead on development  of action 
programmes in relation  to their themes. These will consist of managers and officers  
working in these themes and those supporting clusters, such  as Finance,  where 
required. These groups are outlined in Appendix  A. 
Phase 2 – Define: by end 2020,  present a draft  Plan
Following approval of this proposed  Routemap, Phase 2 will move towards  
establishing the internal systems to support development of a draft  Plan to  enter into 
the Council’s budget setting process. Key activities in this phase may include:
Exploring context and drivers for carbon management and adaptation across  our 
estate and operations. 
Establish the thematic groups:  leadership and governance; awareness and 
behaviour change;  buildings; transport;  and other operations.  These  will be 
supported to collate information on current  initiatives and identify and prioritise a 
programme of activity  in relation to their area of the Plan.   4Defining the Plan’s scope, including definition of our operational boundaries.
Review our climate emission data, setting  an emissions baseline  and projections.
Summarise our climate risks and use our Adaptation Benchmarking to baseline  
our climate adaptation activities. 
Phase 3 – Implement:  from end 2020/21, agree and  deliver the Plan.
Phase three will see a final draft Plan presented  for approval alongside the Council’s 
budget. After which, implementation  will see significant collaborative action across all 
groups over many  years  to put in place the projects identified in the Plan to mitigate 
our emissions and adapt to our changing climate.
We will continually  engage staff, contractors and stakeholders to expand  / adjust  our 
approach in line with evolving requirements, challenges  and opportunities. This 
phase will work hand in hand with Phase  4 – Measure, outlined below.  
Phase 4 – Measure:  Ongoing, monitor and review the Plan
To ensure we remain on track it will be vital to measure and  monitor risks, 
challenges and success in the delivery  of the Plan. This is  an ongoing  phase which 
will involve  formal and informal  liaison,  communication and information exchange 
across and beyond the organisation. It is required to  help identify lessons learned  on 
our journey  and adjustments required in governance, competencies,  methods, 
processes and resources and work with others to bridge these  gaps. It will also allow 
us to remain cognisant of external changes  in legislation, policy,  funding and other 
challenges and opportunities.
We report annually  to the Scottish Government  on work to reduce emissions and 
adapt to climate change. The Plan can help ensure we  meet our  statutory Climate 
Change Reporting  duties while maximising the benefits of  the process to deliver 
stronger outcomes  for our organisation and the city.
Resources
Development and oversight  of the Routemap and Plan will be achieved through 
existing revenue budgets, realigning human  and financial resources where required 
and accessing additional free external support, where available.  
Delivery of the actions  under the arising Plan will be  achieved through  a mix of the 
above as well as our own and external  capital investments. In some cases, action 
may result in reduced  costs and / or income generation, presenting further  
opportunities to re-align budgets. 
Our 2020/21 budget supports the development of net zero and climate adaptation 
priorities with initiatives  including fleet replacement, active travel,  electric  vehicle 5charging, energy efficiency, heating replacement, property refurbishment and  
improvements, district heating and hydrogen projects. 
Additional priorities for action will be identified under the Plan, along  with financial 
options for delivery,  where possible / available.  Where funding  is not available  
through existing means, new opportunities will attempt to be  created and / or matters 
raised with Scottish  Government and other relevant parties for their consideration in  
achieving ours and Scotland’s climate ambitions.  
Appendix A
Thematic Groups 
Five thematic groups  are proposed, as outlined below. Each  group consists  of 
managers and officers  working  in that theme  in their substantive  role. The groups will 
take responsibility for exploring the challenges and opportunities relating to their 
theme and defining  solutions and priorities through a programme of  activity. Potential 
activities for consideration and possible action are outlined under each group below. 
The activities neither form a comprehensive programme nor are guaranteed  to each 
be taken forward.  The final programmes will be informed by a mix of statutory and  
policy requirements, local imperatives,  level of impact, co-benefits and opportunity 
for success  considering  the availability of people, skills, funding  and so on.  
The first two thematic  groups are enabling groups that aim to support and pick up on 
issues which cut across  all, while  the latter three are predominantly project delivery 
groups. 
Group 1: Leadership and governance 
Success is contingent on demonstrating strong leadership and  good governance at 
all levels. We have Leadership in our Administration and Corporate  Management 
Team, alongside  an existing Scheme of Governance and associated protocols  and 
regulations. Proposals under this theme will align with, strengthen elements of and 
compliment these with the aim of meeting  our duties and priorities. Areas for 
consideration under this theme include: 
1. Leaders, at all levels within the organisation, make and follow clear, ambitious 
commitments and present  a single, unambiguous narrative  on climate change  
challenges and responses, linking with our Citywide approach.  
2. Explore, agree and establish  robust systems,  with the right people  and 
processes, and ensuring we remain  ahead of the curve on matters  happening 
beyond our immediate control, i.e. national policy issues.  
3. Co-design, agree and deliver a Council Energy  and Climate Plan and 
associated programme which  captures and, where appropriate, advances  the 6ideas outlined in this Routemap, as well as additional ideas identified on our 
journey.   
4. Consider carbon budget and accounting  options, in parallel to our financial 
systems, to facilitate  robust  data and measurements of change towards net 
zero. 
We have a sustainable procurement  duty, a procurement  footprint of £100’s 
millions per annum and takes a shared  approach to procurement to ensure 
economies of scale. Working with our Procurement Regulations, these  present us 
with a significant opportunity to shape outcomes  through our  purchasing  choices. 
Areas for consideration under this theme  include: 
5. Work with our colleagues in the Commercial Procurement  Shared Service to  
identify, embed  and deliver opportunities to strengthen climate  outcomes 
through our procurement  processes, specifications and choices, across 
products, facilities and services. This may include demanding specific 
certifications, applying green  weightings  and other  options. And, work with our  
suppliers to support them on this journey  with us.  
6. Continue to explore the option  / potential to participate in an Energy Supply  
Company (ESCo) to facilitate delivery  of our renewed energy  and climate 
ambitions, initially through  the Scottish Public Energy  Company  option led by 
the Scottish Government.  
Group 2: Awareness  and behaviour change 
Ambitious and accelerated change requires us to take everyone, at all levels, on our 
journey with us. Technology and processes,  while also critical, can only take us so 
far. Linking strongly with the Leadership and governance  theme, this theme  seeks  to 
engage all to raise their and  others  awareness, knowledge  and competencies and to 
participate fully to understand the challenges and develop and deliver solutions 
ahead. Areas  for consideration under this theme include: 
1. Develop and deliver a Communications Plan, aligned  to our climate  
commitments and Citywide agenda, providing key messages  on climate  change 
challenges and solutions, in different formats, across  a range of  media to 
engage all.  
2. Raise, elected member and officer,  personal awareness of the issues and 
opportunities climate change presents  to the wider society and Aberdeen 
specifically.  
3. Develop and deliver different  formats  and depths of training for all employees to 
help build the awareness  and skills needed  to address and deliver  change. 
4. Explore opportunities  to better connect and empower our people through 
person to person  and / or digital  networks across the organisation for them  to 
share and take forward their climate  solutions.  75. Support to encourage others  to follow our lead from every employee outwards  
to deliver change across the organisation and influence it across the City.   
6. Explore dis/incentives, fiscal and / otherwise, to support behaviour change  
outcomes sought. 
Group 3: Buildings 
Energy use from our buildings is our most  significant source of  emissions by far. 
Increases in our estate  will potentially further  impact our emissions.  That combined 
with fluctuating energy costs and legislative drivers make  this a priority for action.  
The age, range and in/efficiency of our estate means we need to make  significant 
decisions that will affect our new and existing buildings. Decarbonising electricity, 
heating and cooling presents various challenges. 
Our district  heating network links to some  of our residential and public buildings. 
There is an ongoing programme of energy  efficiency measures.  Green roofs are in 
place on several of our buildings, helping to reduce run  off, energy demand and 
providing important space for wildlife.   
Areas for consideration under this theme  include: 
1. Explore opportunities  to build a clearer,  ongoing  understanding of the energy  
demands of our buildings. 
2. Review the Council’s Building Performance Policy  for Council owned  buildings,  
including the certification  standards  demanded.  
3. Explore and develop energy  efficiency opportunities for our buildings.  
4. Explore opportunities  to install  appropriate renewable technologies in existing 
and new buildings, working  towards the phasing out of  fossil fuels.  
5. Build climate adaptation and resilience  into the design of new,  retrofit of existing  
and ongoing management of our buildings, including expanding opportunities  
for blue / green infrastructure to support  water management, heating / cooling 
demands and improved places  for people  and wildlife. 
6. Consider entire site footprints in climate risks and  opportunities; the space 
between buildings as well as the buildings themselves.   
Group 4: Transport 
We have a wide range of vehicles and the decarbonisation  of our fleet has already  
started. Our fleet already includes electric  and hydrogen vans, a hydrogen refuse 
collection vehicle and a hydrogen road sweeping  vehicle. Over 60% of our fleet 
meets the Euro 6 specification. Areas  for consideration under this theme include:   81. Explore options to support our full transition to alternatively  powered, zero 
emission fleet in line with statutory expectations and local policy imperatives.  
2. Explore opportunities  to expand our renewable energy charging / filling points – 
aligning with Citywide electric  vehicle and hydrogen economy approaches.  
Staff travel is a necessary part of our productive working lives today. It  is not always  
an inevitable  requirement and we have  power over our  travel choices. We can work 
to reduce the impact  of our staff travel,  including domestic,  short and long-haul 
flights, rail travel and mileage from petrol  and diesel and hybrid  vehicles.  Staff have 
access to low carbon vehicles through the Co-wheels Car Club. A scheme of 
Smarter Working is already in place enabling home and  flexible working for relevant 
staff. Areas for consideration under  this theme include: 
3. Explore options to increase  the availability  and use  of alternative fuel staff pool  
car(s) to reduce  grey business  mileage  costs. 
4. Promote and increase uptake of the range  of active travel  options where  travel 
is required – including walking, cycling, public transport  and car sharing.  
5. Continue to deliver and expand  our approach  to digital, facilitating  solutions that 
reduce the need to travel altogether, such as Teams conferencing, home / 
mobile working, for both emissions  reduction and extreme events.  
Transport networks , motorised or otherwise, are critical parts of our city’s 
infrastructure, supporting economic  activity, emergency services  and the wellbeing of 
our citizens. It is therefore  essential that they are well deigned  and managed.  Areas 
for consideration  under  this theme include:  
6. Consider the design, build and management of transport  networks under our  
control to address climate  risks and opportunities; remaining operational, with  
less embodied  carbon, more  climate resilience while also people and wildlife  
friendly.   
Group 5: Other  operations 
Our LED street lighting  transition  has been  ongoing  for several years,  resulting in  a 
reduction in energy use, reducing emissions and costs. In  addition, work has taken 
place to explore  ‘smart’ lighting systems to increase the control of street lighting. 
Areas for consideration under this theme  include: 
1. Continue the streetlighting replacement programme moving to LED lanterns, 
while also exploring options for smart city lighting to  potentially further reduce  
emissions. 
We have separate duties under  various  regulations to reduce  the generation of 
internal waste and the types  and quantity of waste going to landfill from our own 9buildings and operations. We have put in place some measures to reduce the use of  
single use plastics. Mixed recycling,  confidential paper, waste electronic  and 
electrical equipment, batteries and food collections are in place  from our buildings.  
There are also collections for a wider  range of waste streams. Areas for  
consideration under this theme include:  
2. Explore options to improve the measurement of  waste and recycling  streams 
from our operations.  
3. Build on current options to reduce the generation of waste  through leasing,  re-
use, repair  and share in support of circular economy principles.  
As temperatures  increase water  will become  less abundant locally.  The supply  and 
treatment of water also creates climate  emissions. While it forms a small part of our  
climate footprint, efficient water  use is an increasing priority  for Aberdeen and 
measures to increase  efficiency are becoming  more important.  Areas for  
consideration under this theme include: 
4. Explore opportunities  to improve  the water efficiency of our  new and  existing 
buildings and other infrastructure through, for example water efficient devices, 
rainwater capture  and grey water recycling. 
Climate change will alter our rain cycle  and growing season, impacting our 
biodiversity and land management. Analyses  suggest the quantity of green spaces 
and infrastructure  is decreasing with our development,  with Aberdeen having  the 
lowest tree cover of Scotland’s cities.  While trees and other blue / green 
infrastructure are not solutions in themselves, they play a critical role in managing  
our climate  and environments; absorbing carbon dioxide, contributing to climate 
resilience and providing co-benefits as critical spaces to protect the health  and 
wellbeing of people and wildlife.  Areas for consideration under  this theme include: 
5. Expand and proactively manage tree & woodland cover across  the urban and 
rural landscapes we own, focusing  on a mix of  climate resilient  species and 
ensuring delivery  of co-benefits. 
6. Protect, increase  and appropriately manage the quantity and types of blue  / 
green infrastructure  across the land and structures we design, deliver  and 
manage, including flood alleviation  schemes and green  roofs and walls as 
business as usual.  
 