Council Climate Change 
Plan 2021 - 2025
Towards a Net Zero and Climate Resilient Council
Aberdeen City Council  I  Council Climate Change Plan 2021 - 20252We are committed to helping to 
address climate change as we want 
to position Aberdeen as a climate 
positive city while helping to lead the 
world on the rapid shift to net zero 
future. This will be achieved through 
taking a lead in delivering climate 
change actions on the city scale both 
working with external partners and 
businesses and through playing our 
part in our own organisation.
We have already set out our ambitious 
goals for Aberdeen in the Net Zero 
City Vision, which include actions 
for other organisations in the public 
sector. I am now delighted to present 
the Council Climate Change Plan 
2021-2025 which aims to show early 
leadership in transitioning to net 
zero through our own assets and 
operations and improving our climate 
resilience.
The Plan sets out the scope of the 
City Council’s ambitions with net zero 
and interim targets for a reduction 
in carbon emissions. It highlights 
climate risks affecting the council and 
it outlines the project priorities across 
five themes being taken forward to 
2025. We are already progressing 
as we have an award-winning green 
fleet which has boosted numbers of 
electric and hydrogen vehicles as part 
of a wider replacement programme. Our plan extends our existing district 
heating networks and includes 
new on-site energy systems for our 
new and existing schools, council 
buildings, our Gold Standard new 
council house building programme, 
and also includes a project to learn 
about retrofit for our housing stock.
All of these actions provide an 
opportunity for the Aberdeen City 
Council to become an exemplar in 
the energy transition towards net zero 
and lead the way in how to change 
in a dynamic and thoughtful way. 
It also aligns to the work of World 
Energy Cities Partnership and its work 
around climate change, local and 
national Government policies, and 
international agreements.
We look forward to the future and 
working with public and private sector 
partner organisations and companies 
to achieve net zero and tackling 
climate change together.
Jenny Laing, Council Leader
ForewordAberdeen City Council  I  Council Climate Change Plan 2021 - 20253Climate Change Plan 2021-2025:  
The purpose of this plan is to set out the Council’s approach, pathway 
and actions towards net zero and climate resilient Council assets and 
operations, by 2045.
Contents Page
1. Executive 
summary1.1 Introduction and targets 2
1.2 Key milestones to 2025 3
1.3 Council climate change plan summary 4
1.4 The journey so far 6
1.5 How will we meet our 2025 target? – project 
summary on a page7
2. Plan context 2.1 Background 8
2.2 Key drivers 8
2.3 On the horizon 9
3. Emissions 3.1 Scope of reporting 10
3.2 Our reported CO2 emissions 11
3.3 Beyond our reporting 12
4 Climate risks 4.1 Climate impacts for the region 12
4.2 Climate risks affecting the Council 13
4.3 Adaptation benchmarking 13
5. The 
approach5.1 Towards a net zero and climate resilient Council 15
5.2 Governance 15
6. Themes 6.1 Buildings 20
6.2 Mobility 22
6.3 Other operations 24
6.4 Leadership and governance 26
6.5 Awareness and behaviour change 28
7. Aligning with 
SDGs7.1 Aligning with the UN sustainable development goals 
(SDGs)301. Executive summary
1.1 Introduction and targets
Following Committee on Climate Change recommendations, the UK has 
pursued ambitious net zero greenhouse gas targets.
Aberdeen City Council recognises the challenge of climate change 
and the need to reduce emissions to play our part in limiting global 
emissions, as well as preparing for the impacts of a changing climate. 
We have been making progress, leading city low carbon technology 
with 2 hydrogen refuelling stations, a growing hydrogen bus fleet and an 
innovative energy centre at Aberdeen’s event complex.
We have also taken action to reduce the Council’s own carbon footprint. 
Rolling out LED street lighting, expanding the range of electric and 
hydrogen vehicles in our own fleet - increasing connections to district 
heating for some of our public buildings and Council housing, and 
installing several green roofs. 
But a transition towards a net zero and climate resilience will require an 
increased scale of ambition, a faster pace of change and a different way 
of doing things.  Strengthening our climate commitments, in May 2020, 
we approved:
 ♦A Net Zero Vision for Aberdeen and supporting Strategic 
Infrastructure Plan (SIP), which includes a goal for a Net Carbon 
Zero – Public Sector.
 ♦A Council Energy and Climate Plan Routemap setting out phased 
approaches to developing a plan to reduce emissions from Council 
assets and activity and to adapt to climate to climate change. 
Expanding on the Routemap, this Climate Change Plan 2021 – 2025 
aims to demonstrate leadership, state our ambitions and support our 
progress with public sector climate duties. It sets a net zero target 
for Aberdeen City Council’s own assets and operations and drives a 
significant increase in actions to reduce carbon emissions and to build 
resilience. Delivery of the plan will make an active contribution to the 
Council’s wider net zero city commitment.Aberdeen City Council  I  Council Climate Change Plan 2021 - 20254Our targets
We will achieve net zero corporate carbon emissions* by 2045 at 
the latest
with interim targets of: 
- a reduction of at least 48% by 2025 
- a reduction of at least 75% by 2030 
(against Council 2015/16 reporting baseline)
This plan will be reviewed in 2025 and thereafter every 5 years, 
or earlier taking into account changes to legislation strategy and 
guidelines.
* For the purpose of this plan carbon emissions refers to tonnes of 
carbon dioxide equivalent (tCO2e). 
In order to deliver the plan we will:
 ♦Be an exemplar for net zero and climate resilience through actions 
to reduce direct and indirect emissions and measures to manage 
the climate risks to our estate and operations
 ♦Re-shape our operational activity but also where possible go 
beyond this for reductions to our whole carbon footprint and to 
examine our wider influence
 ♦Establish partnerships for the delivery of projects
 ♦Contribute our part to the delivery of:
- The Scottish Government emission reduction target of Net 
Zero by 2045 (the net-zero emission target). Climate Change 
(Emission Reduction Targets) (Scotland) Act 2019
- Scotland’s Climate Change Adaptation Programme
- Aberdeen Local Outcome Improvement Plan’s stretch outcome 
on addressing climate change.1.2 Key milestones to 2025
Figure 1: key milestones diagram
2030  
Review & publish 
revised plan
2035 
Review & 
publish 
revised plan
2040  
Review & publish 
revised plan34% emission reduction
Expand scalable solutions
Indicative 
83% 
reduction 
tCO2e
Indicative 
91% 
reduction 
tCO2e
Net Zero by 
2045 at the 
latest2015/16 
Baseline 
46,370.9 tCO2eCouncil 
Energy & 
Climate 
Routemap 
approved2021  
Launch 
plan
2025  
Review 
and publish 
revised plan48% 
reduction 
tCO2e2019/20 
Emissions 
30,563.2 
tCO2e
75% 
reduction 
tCO2e ♦Climate embedded in 
Council strategy/ policy 
guidance (2021)
 ♦Hydrogen for heat 
feasibility study (2021)
 ♦Retrofit pilot,100 
Council homes (2021)
 ♦Marischal College LED 
lighting upgrade (2021)
 ♦Fleet cars small vans 
decarbonised (2025)
 ♦100% street lighting 
LED (2025)
 ♦Transition to low 
carbon small 
machinery (2025)
 ♦Expand district heating 
connections - (ongoing) ♦Conversion to dual 
fuel refuse collection 
vehicles (2021
 ♦Fleet optimisation 
(2022)
 ♦Council carbon budget 
in place (2022)
 ♦2,000 new Council 
homes Gold Standard 
(2023)Aberdeen City Council  I  Council Climate Change Plan 2021 - 202551.3 Council Climate Change Plan summary 
The plan has five themes covering Council assets and operations:
Buildings Mobility Other Operations Leadership & Governance Awareness & Behaviour 
Change
Council buildings & Council 
housingFleet & staff travel Street lighting, internal 
waste, nature based actionProcesses, procurement and 
decision makingCommunications, 
participation and training
Operational themes Enabling themes
Each theme has a range of projects up to 2025 – aim to meet outcomes of:
Reduced energy demand Zero emission fleet Upgraded street lighting Improved data management Greater awareness (staff and 
elected members)
Low carbon/ renewable 
energy Low carbon fleet infrastructure  Increase in nature based 
solutions Climate risk management Capability building 
Increased resilience 
(buildings)Reduced emissions from staff 
travelWater management Climate considerations 
embedded in Strategy & 
Policy developmentIncreased participation
Improved standards 
(buildings)Resilient design and 
management - infrastructureInternal waste minimisation/ 
sustainable cateringStrategic resource allocation Wider engagement 
Our Projects 
Our ambition is to achieve a 48% reduction in emissions by 2025 .
National net zero targets and adaptation outcomes are driving further changes to legislation, regulation and proposing new statutory and voluntary standards 
which will emerge during the course of this plan.
Our Project Register will be kept under continuous review and updated as new opportunities and risks are identified. 
Where our monitoring indicates we are not on track our governance process allows us to be agile and we will identify additional actions to take us further. 
Partnership working is driving many of our actions and we welcome collaborative work to deliver our projects.Aberdeen City Council  I  Council Climate Change Plan 2021 - 20256
Newly-built council houses Green roof – Pets’ Corner building, Hazlehead ParkAberdeen City Council  I  Council Climate Change Plan 2021 - 202571.4 The journey so far
Over and above our city wide net zero actions,  key actions have already 
contributed to a reduction in the Council’s own carbon emissions and to 
increased resilience:
3,603 Council flats and houses and 26 public buildings and sheltered 
housing complexes connected to Combined Heat and Power (CHP) 
Energy Centres in the city.
LED lighting upgrade Bridge of Don Academy.
Building management system and heating control upgrades for various 
schools. 
Biomass is operating at Duthie Park.
Our Council Condition and Suitability programme covers energy 
efficiency improvements. 
Energy Performance Certificates EPC’s show energy efficiency ratings 
for Council buildings (over 1,000m2).
Green roofs have been installed at Pets’ Corner and the Crematorium 
extension.
The Council was a winner in the 2020 Green Fleet Awards. 
A growing electric and hydrogen Council fleet of 20 electric vans, 
1 electric compact sweeper, 1 electric mini digger, 3 hydrogen cars, 
5 diesel/ hydrogen vehicles, 40 hybrid vehicles, in addition to city 
hydrogen buses.
Electric and hydrogen vehicles can be booked for Council staff use 
through the Co-Wheels Car Club. 
Electric vehicle charge points installed: 22 Council fleet, 16 Car Club, 
form part of more than 100 in the city.
Cycle travel is included in staff mileage. Pool bikes and cycle storage 
are available in several premises.Our rolling LED street lighting programme has reduced emissions from 
street lighting by about 58%.
An award winning wetland area established in Seaton Park in a space 
prone to flooding.
Bronze Food for Life Award, achieved from the Soil Association for 
sustainable school meals. 
Use of compostable consumables across the board in all Facilities 
Management Catering sites. 
Case study: New House Build Programme
246 new council houses have already 
been built at Smithfield, Manor Walk 
and Wellheads. In total the Council’s new house 
building programme will build 2,000 
new homes, with the further phases 
included in this plan. 
The programme includes connections and expansions to the Combined 
Heat and Power network, where practical. It aims to integrate measures, 
including cycle storage, space for homeworking, green roofs on bin 
stores and dedicated green space. 
At the Manor Walk site, the burn was de-culverted and brought to the 
surface to allow for biodiversity with planted marshlands, meadow grass 
and trees.Aberdeen City Council  I  Council Climate Change Plan 2021 - 202581.5 How will we achieve our 2025 target? 
Project summary on a page
2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
Deliver project DORIC, a whole house 
retrofit pilot for 100 houses 4
Run a pilot for the Net Zero Carbon 
Standard Public Buildings4
Build 4 new schools to EPC A rating, with 
natural outdoor areas44
Develop on site energy schemes - 
identified new Council houses, schools
Expand connections to existing heat 
networks & plan wider connections 44444
Build 2,000 in total, new Council houses to 
Gold Standard 2020-202244
Energy efficiency measures and building 
upgrades for Council buildings  44444
Install heat pumps, solar PV and battery 
storage for Kaimhill new homes4
Develop the Torry Heat Network 
connecting to Energy from Waste444
Ongoing energy efficiency upgrades for 
Council housing stock44444
Feasibility study to inform hydrogen for 
heat demand4
Lighting upgrade to LED, Marischal 
College4
A Fleet Review, identify numbers/ cost for 
hydrogen and electric vehicles4
Replacement of petrol and diesel fleet to 
hydrogen and electric vehicles44444
Identify locations, electric vehicle charge 
points, for fleet and staff vehicles44
Convert 42 refuse collection fleet vehicles 
to dual fuel (hydrogen/ diesel)4
Fleet optimisation analysing required fleet 
vehicle size and numbers 44
Update the staff travel policy, including a 
grey fleet review44Increase the number of Co-Wheels Car 
Club vehicles accessible for staff444
Expand secure cycle storage in Council 
buildings & car parks44444
Increase use of sensor technology to 
monitor areas at risk of flooding44444
Complete LED street lighting replacement 
programme44444
Phased Intelligent Street Lighting 
Programme  44444
Support, promote and integrate circular 
economy principles444
Test the installation and retrofit of blue 
green infrastructure (BGI) 44444
Mapping blue/ green infrastructure 
opportunity sites44444
Pilot low carbon small machinery 44444
Expand a programme of tree planting on 
Council owned land44444
Use of local, sustainable, seasonable, 
products in Council catering44444
Review, replace old catering equipment 
with energy efficient models44444
Develop and implement a carbon budget 
for the Plan44
Establish a platform for collating, 
monitoring, and reporting climate data4
Integrate climate change in our policy, 
strategy and business cases 4
Strengthen delivery of climate priorities, 
through procurement processes4
Integrate sustainability in the Council 
Capability Framework4
Develop, launch and maintain a staff green 
champions network44444
Develop and implement a staff training 
plan on climate change44444
Plan and deliver a staff awareness raising 
programme44
Inform city schools and teachers about 
Council commitments and actions4Aberdeen City Council  I  Council Climate Change Plan 2021 - 202592. Plan context
2.1 Background
Climate Change (Scotland) Acts set the legal framework for climate 
action with duties for the public sector on reducing emissions, adapting 
to climate change and reporting annually on progress. The introduction 
of a net zero target by 2045 by Scottish Government has required a 
strengthening of ambition to address climate change across the public 
sector.
2.2 Key drivers 
Global
 ♦The 2015 Paris Agreement sets a global commitment to limit 
global warming to 1.5oC. 
 ♦An Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) special 
report in 2018 highlighted the need for rapid and far reaching 
change to reach this target. The UN Climate Conference 
COP26 is planned to take place in Glasgow in 2021 and aims to 
accelerate action towards the goals of the Paris Agreement.
 ♦Climate Action is one of the 17 United Nations Sustainable 
Development Goals, encouraging urgent action to combat climate 
change and its impacts. Alignment with the SDGs is included in 
section 7.
National
 ♦The Climate Change Act 2008 sets a framework for a UK 
reduction in greenhouse gas emissions and provision for 
adaptation to climate change.
 ♦The Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009 set climate change 
duties for public bodies which include:
 -contributing to the delivery of national emission targets 
 -adapting to help deliver the national adaptation programme 
 -acting sustainably ♦The Committee on Climate Change report 2019, Net Zero: the UK 
Government Committee contribution to stopping global warming, 
was produced in response to a request to reassess the UK’s long-
term emissions targets. It stated net-zero is necessary, to meet UK 
commitments as a signatory of the Paris Agreement. 
 ♦The Climate Change (Emissions Reduction Targets) Act 2019 has 
amended greenhouse gas emissions targets under the Climate 
Change (Scotland) Act 2009, with a Scottish Government target 
to reduce Scotland’s greenhouse gases emissions to net-zero* by 
2045 at the latest. With interim reduction targets: 
 -56% below the baseline by 2020
 -75% below the baseline by 2030
 -90% below the baseline by 2040
 ♦The Climate Change (Duties of Public Bodies: Reporting 
Requirements) (Scotland) Amendment Order 2020 amends the 
information public bodies must include in annual Climate Change 
Reports. Future reports will ask organisatiaons for their target 
date for zero direct emissions, for reducing indirect emissions 
and how they will align spending plans and use of resources to 
delivering reduction targets. Scottish Government guidance on 
this is anticipated.
 ♦Climate Ready Scotland, the Scottish adaptation programme, 
was updated in 2019, addressing the risks for Scotland identified 
in the UK Climate Risk Assessment and through UK Climate 
Projections (UKCP18).
 ♦Scotland’s Climate Change Plan Update (CCPu) was published 
in 2020. This sets out the Scottish Government approach to 
reaching Net Zero targets. It states Scotland’s public sector 
bodies have a strong leadership role in delivering the transition to 
net zero. Aberdeen City Council  I  Council Climate Change Plan 2021 - 202510Local
 ♦Action under this Plan supports the delivery of outcomes under 
Aberdeen’s Local Outcome Improvement Plan (LOIP), specifically 
the stretch outcome on addressing climate change.
 ♦The Council’s Delivery Plan sets out our purpose, which is 
aligned to the vision of the LOIP - Aberdeen; ‘a place where all 
people can prosper’
 ♦The Council Budget 2020/21 included a spending commitment of 
£100 million on green initiatives at Council and City scale.  
A Net Zero Vision for Aberdeen was approved in 2020, along 
with a supporting Strategic Infrastructure Plan for Energy 
Transition, supporting the region’s transition towards net zero. 
The plan includes projects under a Net Zero Carbon Public 
Sector category.
 ♦Aberdeen Adapts, a Climate Adaptation Framework for the city 
was approved in December 2019 setting out goals and priority, 
actions to build climate resilience over the long term.
 ♦The Council has entered a partnership with BP. This is exploring 
support for zero-carbon technology innovation, with potential 
opportunities for the City and the Council plans.
*net zero - the Committee on Climate Change scenario for net-zero has 
all sectors at zero, or virtually zero, emissions except for agriculture, 
some parts of industry, and international aviation. Remaining emissions 
from these sectors will need to be balanced, or outweighed, by negative 
emissions solutions such as tree planting.2.3 On the horizon – Scottish Government targets and 
timelines
The Scottish Government proposed New Build Heat Standard aims 
that all new builds given consent from 2024 must use heating systems 
which produce zero direct emissions at the point of use. Below are other 
targets that the Scottish Government has set itself and must comply with. 
Council understanding of these targets may assist with the development 
of plans and projects in support of progress with its public sector climate 
duty, of demonstrating how it is going to contribute to the emissions 
targets set by the Scottish Government.
End on landfilling of biodegradable municipal waste 2025
Phase out the need for new petrol and diesel light 
commercial vehicles from the public sector fleet By 2025
Phase out the need for new petrol and diesel vehicles in 
Scotland’s public sector fleetBy 2030
Phase out the need for new petrol and diesel cars and vans 
(Scotland)By 2030
Reduce emissions from Scotland’s rail passenger services 
to zero By 2035
Decarbonise scheduled flights in Scotland By 2040
Target for no more than 5% of Scottish households being in 
fuel poverty By 2040
Net Zero Scotland By 2045Aberdeen City Council  I  Council Climate Change Plan 2021 - 2025113. Emissions
3.1 Scope of reporting
This plan covers the emissions from the Council’s assets and activities currently 
measured for our annual climate reporting requirements for Scottish Government.  
To allow for meaningful comparisons of emissions over time; the Council follows public 
bodies guidance on climate reporting, using data that is consistent. Figures 2 & 3 
show the scope of our reported emissions: 
Scope 1 – 61% of emissions are from petrol and diesel fuelled fleet; and the use of gas 
and oil in our buildings. 
Scope 2 – 34% of emissions are from electricity use in buildings, streetlighting and for 
electric vehicles.
Scope 3 – 5% of emissions are from staff travel, water supply and treatment; 
and certain internal waste streams (mixed recycling, WEEE, glass, paper and 
cardboard and food waste). Reported emissions by scope
  Overall scope 1 
  Overall scope 2
  Overall scope 361%34%5%
Figure 2: our measured carbon footprint 
Direct fuel use Buildings Fleet Scope 1
Direct GHG emissions from sources owned or 
controlled by the Council.
Scope 2
Emissions from the generation of purchased energy.
Scope 3 
Indirect emissions that organisations produce through 
activities but occur from sources not owned or 
controlled by the organisation.
Staff commute is currently out of scope of Council 
reporting. 
Household waste is outwith the scope of this plan. gas oil petrol diesel
Electricity Buildings Electricity 
BuildingsElectricity
Street LightingElectricity 
Street lighting
generation transmission 
distributiongeneration transmission 
distribution
Water Business Travel
supply treatment air other
Internal Waste car mileage rail 
recycling landfill Electricity
electric vehiclesElectricity
electric vehiclescompost
generation transmission 
distributionAberdeen City Council  I  Council Climate Change Plan 2021 - 2025123.2 Our reported CO2 emissions
Corporate carbon emissions* reported over the last 5 years are 
summarised in Figure 3. These show a 34% reduction in carbon 
emissions since our baseline year of 2015/16.  Our baseline 
encompasses the scope of data required for the annual Council Climate 
Change Report, allowing for consistency in year on year monitoring 
since statutory reporting was introduced.
Figure 3: Council carbon emissions since baseline year
Baseline year 2015/16 - 46,370.9 tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (tCO2e)
Since then emissions have reduced by 34%
Emissions (tCO2e) 2015/16 2016/17 2017/18 2018/19 2019/20
Buildings 33,545.4 27,443.4 26,407.5 23,118.7 23,020.7
Street lighting 8,149.7 6,403.8 5,358.7 3,980.9 3,424.8
Fleet 3,774.9 3,873.0 3,323.9 3,113.5 3,295.1
Staff travel 469.4 728.4 459.0 537.6 382.7
Internal waste 213.1 511.9 57.6 26.2 133.0
Water 218.4 277.7 285.7 313.5 306.9
46,370.9 39,238.2 35,892.4 31,090.4 30,563.2
72% of our emissions come from energy for buildings. 
Street lighting at 18% and fleet at 8% are also key areas to target.
*emissions calculated using UK emission factors, updated annually by Department for Business 
Energy and Industrial Strategy Since 2015/16, emissions from:
i) Buildings have decreased through changes in emission factors due 
to greening of the National Grid and actions including; 
 ♦District heating connections. 
 ♦Energy efficiency measures. 
ii) Street lighting also decreased, again through greening of the 
National Grid and actions including: 
 ♦LED street lighting replacement.
 ♦Intelligent Street Lighting Programme.
iii) Fleet has also decreased through: 
 ♦The addition of electric, hydrogen, hydrogen/ diesel and hybrid 
vehicles to our fleet.
 ♦Nearly 97% of our fleet meeting Euro 6 standards.
iv) Route optimisation for waste collection vehicles. 
Staff travel has decreased, although emissions have fluctuated over 
the 5 years depending on mode and km travelled. Actions have 
included:
 ♦Staff access to electric and hydrogen vehicles, for work travel, 
through Co-Wheels Car Club. 
 ♦Cycle to work scheme and workplace cycle storage.
v) Internal waste has decreased, although there are fluctuations. This 
may be due to the way data was captured and reported; as well as 
a changes in emission factors. Actions included continued recycling 
and a reduction in single use plastic. 
vi) Water has shown an increase.Aberdeen City Council  I  Council Climate Change Plan 2021 - 2025132015/16     2016/17     2017/18     2018/19   2019/20
 Travel   Street Lighting   Waste   Water   Fleet   BuildingsFigure 4: Annual emissions (tCO2e)
50000
45000
40000
35000
30000
25000
20000
15000
10000
5000
0
3.3 Beyond our reporting boundary
Our whole footprint
The Council reports our corporate scope 1 and 2 emissions and certain 
scope 3 emissions where data aligns with greenhouse gas principles of 
relevance, completeness, consistency, transparency and accuracy. This 
is known as our reporting boundary.
This plan includes actions which aim to improve our monitoring and 
reporting over time. This may also help to identify and clarify sources of 
corporate emissions that may still be outwith this reporting boundary but 
are still of interest, such as our procurement and some of our internal 
waste streams. 
Emissions from Council Housing
We have a role to play in putting in place the low carbon infrastructure 
and advice to improve the energy efficiency and resilience of our 
Council homes. The Council manages more than 22,000 Council 
homes, with 52% of our housing stock more than 50 years old. 
Energy Performance Certificates (EPCs) for Council Housing are carried 
out by in-house Domestic EPC surveyors, 2019/20 figures for Council 
Housing showed a 5% improvement for the Energy Efficiency Standard 
for Social Housing (EESSH) from the previous year. As we cannot 
calculate operational emissions from our Council housing stock, they are not included in our corporate reporting. However, by monitoring energy 
performance we can estimate emissions from our Council housing stock 
at point of use, with this indicating 52,885 tCO2e in 2019/20. 
The Council has an ongoing programme to upgrade housing stock 
and improve energy efficiency. Our Housing Revenue Account Budget 
2020/ 2021 includes spending priorities to reduce heat loss and 
improve energy efficiency including: cavity wall and loft insulation; solid 
wall insulation; and heating system replacement. However, over and 
above individual measures a more comprehensive approach will be 
crucial to meet changing legislative requirements for energy efficiency in 
social housing and a range of actions are included in this plan. 
Arms Length Organisations (ALEOs)
Our ALEOs have their own climate commitments and are proactive with 
their own plans and as such, are not included in our corporate reporting 
boundary.
4. Climate risks
4.1 Climate impacts for the region
Adaptation is an adjustment to current climate and weather; as well as 
to future climate change. Climate change projections* for Aberdeen 
indicate an increase in the severity and frequency of severe weather.
Winter rainfall will increase, with heavier rainfall, increasing 
the risk of flooding and water penetration.
Summer temperatures will increase and there will be a 
reduction in summer rainfall. 
There will be an increase in winter temperatures, with less 
snow, ice and frost days.
Sea level will rise. Risk of tidal surge and wave overtopping 
causing coastal flooding and erosion
*(UKCP18) – UK Climate ProjectionsAberdeen City Council  I  Council Climate Change Plan 2021 - 2025144.2 Climate risks affecting the Council
An updated Local Climate Impact Profile was produced in 2020, reviewing the impact of weather on Council functions (for 2014-2019) and our 
response to severe weather events, including Storm Frank and the Beast from the East snowfall. A climate risk assessment has been completed and 
climate change is included in the Council Corporate Risk Register.  The potential impact of climate change to the Council and associated control 
actions will be further articulated across cluster and operational risk registers.
Figure 5:  Current weather impacts experienced by the Council and future climate risks
Current weather impacts experienced by the Council Future climate risks
BuildingsSome damage to building interior, mechanical, 
electrical and water services from flooding/ water 
penetration.
Burst pipes – ice, frost.Increase in damage to building structure and contents 
from flooding, water penetration and subsidence. 
Higher maintenance & repair costs. Increased need for 
water efficiency measures and cooling. Risk of power 
outages.
Roads/ transportDamage to road surfaces. Costs & demands on staff 
time for flood response, snow clearance, gritting. 
Travel disruptions.Higher maintenance & repair costs for road and path 
surfaces, pot holes and sink holes. Lifespan of roads, 
pavements, paths reduced. Increased demands on 
staff for flood response. Greater travel disruptions.
Waste/ parks and 
groundsWaste and recycling collections disrupted – storms, 
flooding & snow.  Fallen or damaged trees.Damage to waste infrastructure. Waste and recycling 
collections disrupted – increase in flooding, heavy 
rainfall & storms. Demands on staff time for post 
flooding clean-up operations.  Increase in tree 
damage. Longer growing season. Increase in pests, 
disease and risk of wildfire.
Leadership/ finance/ 
procurementCosts for damage and repair. Emergency response & 
recovery (flood events).Increased pressure on budgets. Increased insurance 
costs. Impact on delivery of services. Demands for 
emergency response & recovery. Impact on the cost 
and availability of goods. 
4.3 Adaptation Benchmarking 
The Council is a participant in the Adaptation Scotland, Adaptation Benchmarking Tool Working Group. Figure 6 indicates our adaptation progress 
against the Adaptation Benchmarking Capability Framework for a Climate Ready Public Sector. This will be reviewed annually to assess our 
progress over the long term.Aberdeen City Council  I  Council Climate Change Plan 2021 - 202515Figure 6: Adaptation Benchmarking Toolkit – assessment summary Aberdeen City Council
Starting Intermediate Advanced MatureOrganisational 
Culture & ResourcesOC1A Examine the structure & priorities of 
the organisationOC2A Secure resources to plan and 
deliver adaptationOC3A   Identify opportunities to include 
adaptation in plans, policies and 
proceduresOC4A   Mainstream adaptation into 
Council plans, policies and procedures
OC1B Identify resources available for 
adaptationOC2B Engage colleagues to identify 
adaptation opportunities and potential 
‘champions’OC3B Motivate ‘champions’ and actively 
promote adaptation across the CouncilOC4B Develop a network of recognised 
adaptation ‘champions’
OC2C Establish governance 
arrangements for adaptationOC3C Put governance arrangements for 
adaptation into operationOC4C   Review and update governance 
arrangements for adaptationUnderstanding the 
challengeUC1A Learn about climate trends and 
projectionsUC2A Develop understanding of climate 
risk and vulnerabilityUC3A Develop (scenarios, storylines, 
narratives) for future climate change 
impacts/ vulnerabilitiesUC4A Mainstreaming of climate change 
risk assessment
UC1B Learn about climate impacts 
affecting ScotlandUC2B Consider how the Council might be 
affected by climate changeUC3B Undertake strategic climate change 
risk assessmentUC4B Accessible climate adaptation 
knowledge that is integrated into internal 
systems and procedures
UC2C Explore the impact of recent 
weather events on your organisationUC3C Undertake project-level risk as-
sessmentUC4C Actively engaged in sharing, 
learning, research and innovation
UC3D Identify knowledge gaps, seek 
expertise and foster links with research 
and innovationPlanning & 
implementationPI1A Identify existing adaptation work 
within ACC.PI2A Define strategic adaptation goals, 
outcomes and/or visionPI3A Explore adaptation pathways / theo-
ry of changePI4A Adopt an ongoing adaptive 
management cycle for adaptation 
planning
PI1B Demonstrate how the Council 
contributes to Scotland’s work to adaptPI2A Define strategic adaptation goals, 
outcomes and/or visionPI3B Appraisal of adaptation options PI4B Taking action on adaptation is 
mainstreamed into Council (functions / 
services)
PI1C Identify key internal stakeholders for 
adaptationPI2C Develop an initial adaptation (strate-
gy and) action planPI3C Develop a comprehensive 
adaptation strategy and action planPI4C Implement pathways for adaptation / 
transformational change
PI2D Take action to deliver initial adapta-
tion (measures, options, actionsPI3D Implement a programme of 
adaptation (measures, actions)Working togetherWT1A Join/ participate in relevant profes-
sional and/or networksWT2A Make connections with external 
partnersWT3A Begin to formalise partnership 
workingWT4A Further develop and maintain 
partnership working
WT1B Identify and research relevant ex-
ternal organisations and partnershipsWT2B Coordinate with partners to deliver 
initial actionsWT3B Engage a wide range of 
stakeholdersWT4B Sustain engagement with partners 
and stakeholders
WT2C Develop communication and 
engagement activities WT3C Implement further joint actions WT4C Expand a programme of joint 
actions  
    Complete
    Ongoing
    To startWT3D Join networks and link with peer 
organisations.Aberdeen City Council  I  Council Climate Change Plan 2021 - 2025165. Approach
5.1 Towards a net zero and climate resilient Council
Our approach, outlined in Figure 7, has gathered data on emissions and 
climate risks and built understanding of the current situation, barriers 
and opportunities for change. It had examined existing policy, projects 
and programmes and planned and prioritised new actions to target 
the most significant sources of emissions and areas of climate risk. 
Ongoing monitoring will help show progress, from this we can learn 
from our successes, identify where more action is needed and plan the 
subsequent activity needed to deliver our target.
Figure 7: Council Climate Change Plan approach
Monitor, 
measure, 
review
2045 Net ZeroExamine context 
- opportunities/ 
threatsGather evidence 
- emissions and 
climate risks
Target worst 
emissions/ key 
climate risks
Calculate an 
annual carbon 
budgetPlan & prioritise 
actionsImprove data 
collation/ 
managementRoutemap approved 2020
Approve plan 2021
2025 review and publish 
revised plan
2030 review and publish 
revised plan
2035 review and publish 
revised plan
2040 review and publish 
revised plan5.2 Governance
A Council Climate Oversight Group (Figure 8) supports the development 
and implementation of the plan. Led by the Council’s Chief Operating 
Officer, the group has input from senior managers and from the leads for 
5 themed sub groups. 
There are 3 operational themes responsible for the development and 
implementation of low carbon and climate adaptation actions for Council 
assets and operations; These cover Buildings looking at our Council 
buildings and Council housing. Mobility covering our fleet and staff 
travel; and Other Operations including street lighting, internal waste 
and water management. A further 2 theme groups in leadership and 
Management; and Awareness and Behaviour Change are developing 
and implementing enabling actions.
Officers from the Net Zero City Delivery Unit also sit on the Oversight 
Group to ensure Council activity aligns with our wider city actions.
Figure 8: Governance Approach
Support – co-ordinate, monitor, inform,report.Council Climate Oversight Group (CCOG)
Sponsor & Chair – Chief Operating OfficerReport: to the  
Performance Board
Liaise: Net Zero City 
officers sit on the 
Oversight Group
Lead from each sub-group report to the 
Oversight Group
Thematic sub groups Governance: Business 
cases go through PMO 
process and relevant 
boards.Leadership & Governance
Awareness & Behaviour Change
Buildings Mobility Other 
operationsAberdeen City Council  I  Council Climate Change Plan 2021 - 202517
5.2.1 Programme management of the plan
A Project Register is established and will sit on the Council website. 
This is intended to be a “live” document, prioritising actions needed, 
alongside available resources. Additional opportunities may emerge 
through new technology and external funding routes.
5.2.2 Carbon budgeting
Carbon accounting to measure and monitor the Council’s direct and 
indirect emissions will be necessary to deliver any net zero target. 
The development of a Council Carbon Budget aims to improve 
understanding of our energy consumption, in doing so, the costs 
associated with carbon expenditure. To stay within this budget requires 
cutting carbon emissions from the Council’s own assets and operations, 
by an agreed amount each year.A Council Carbon Budget will be prepared annually, aligning with the 
budget setting process and carbon allocations apportioned, agreed and 
assigned to a Function or Cluster based on their influence on action. 
This aims to build greater accountability for the delivery of actions and 
improve understanding of corporate carbon emissions. 
The carbon budget will be piloted for the first year of this plan, in 
dialogue with relevant officers. It has been calculated using a linear 
trajectory, from our baseline year 2015/16, to align with Scottish 
Government’s interim target to reduce Scotland’s greenhouse 
gases emissions by 75% by 2030.  The Carbon Budget will be 
reviewed annually against the delivery of any existing and new 
projects and adjusted, where required, to keep on track with a reduction 
in Council emissions of at least 48% by 2025.
5.2.3 Offsetting  
The Council does not currently include any use of offsetting in emission 
calculations. This plan will focus on reducing operational emissions in 
the first instance to reduce and limit the need for offset in future years. 
Scottish Government guidance on the public sector use of offsetting for 
residual emissions is anticipated and the Council will wait for this to be 
published before developing any plans. 
Making a contribution to carbon sinks, actions within this plan include 
developing a strategic approach to our trees, forests and woodlands, 
identifying areas of Council land suitable for tree planting and extending 
our tree planting. In addition, we will explore areas to expand wildflower 
meadows recognising through all of these we can make use of our land 
to contribute to wider carbon stocks.
5.2.4 Measuring, monitoring & reviewing the Plan
The Council Climate Oversight Group will monitor the progress of this 
Plan. Reports on progress with actions in this plan will be collated, with 
qualitive and quantitative information reported on a quarterly basis to the 
Council’s Performance Board. 
Our actions include improvements to data capture and performance 
reporting on climate change. Indicators include:Pipe work for Torry Heat NetworkAberdeen City Council  I  Council Climate Change Plan 2021 - 202518Relevant measures/ indicators Currently 
capturedOften Where
1 Electricity – emissions tCO2e (Council buildings) Yes Annual Climate Change Report
2 Gas - emissions tCO2e (Council buildings) Yes Annual Climate Change Report
3 Oil - emissions tCO2e (Council buildings) Yes Annual Climate Change Report
4 Energy renewables (Council buildings) - kWh Yes Annual Climate Change Report
5 Use of renewables – No. Council housing stock * * *
6 Water emissions tCO2e (Council buildings) Yes Annual Climate Change Report
7 EPC ratings – relevant Council buildings Yes Ongoing on ACC website
8 EPC ratings – Council Housing Yes Ongoing Housing
9 Accreditation (Gold Standard, BREEAM etc) Yes Ad hoc Relevant to projects
10 Reduction of Carbon Emissions * * Property Asset Management 
11 Reduction in Energy Consumption per year Yes Property Asset Management 
12 No. Operational Buildings Connected to District Heating Yes Property Asset Management 
13 No. Council houses connected to District Heating * * *
14 Petrol - emissions tCO2e (fleet) Yes Annual Climate Change Report
15 Diesel - emissions tCO2e (fleet) Yes Annual Climate Change Report
16 % of fleet transitioned from fossil fuels * * *
17 Air travel – emissions tCO2e (short and long haul) Yes Annual Climate Change Report
18 Rail travel emissions tCO2e Yes Annual Climate Change Report
19 Km travelled (business travel – petrol, diesel, hybrid, electric) Yes Annual Climate Change Report
20 % of staff utilising home working to reduce travel  * * LOIP 
21 Electricity – emissions tCO2e (street lighting) Yes * Climate Change Report
22 Mixed recycling – tonnes (Council) Yes Annual Climate Change Report
23 Organic food and drink composting tonnes (Council) Yes Annual Climate Change Report
24 Waste electronic and electrical equipment tonnes Yes Annual Climate Change Report
25 No. of public sector workforce ambassadors of low carbon living and working Yes Ongoing LOIP 
26 No. of people taking part in environment/ sustainability educational activities Yes Ongoing LOIP 
27 % of workforce completing Climate Awareness Training within the Council Yes Ongoing *
* Further indicators may be included as projects develop. Aberdeen City Council  I  Council Climate Change Plan 2021 - 202519
A Climate Change Report on progress with meeting climate duties 
under Part 4 of the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009 is reported 
through City Growth and Resources Committee, in October/ November 
annually before submission to Scottish Government. To meet statutory 
requirements, the report documents carbon emissions from Council 
assets and operations, alongside information on actions to reduce the 
Council’s carbon footprint and to adapt to climate change.  The report 
will indicate progress with this plan.
Existing performance and reporting requirements already in place 
include:
 ♦Our annual reporting includes a Statutory Performance Indicator 
(SPI) on corporate emissions.
 ♦Updates are provided on the current climate change risk entries 
in the Corporate Risk Register and reported to the Council’s Risk 
Board.
5.2.5 Review
The Plan will be reviewed in 2025 and updated where required and 
taking into account any changes to legislation and guidance relating to 
climate change. Following this, the plan will be reviewed every 5 years. 
5.2.6 Communicating the plan
Information on the Council’s climate change progress and our 
commitments is included on the Council website. However, the 
difference between providing information and making it accessible is 
recognised. 
Internal and external communications are represented on the Council 
Climate Oversight Group and communication activities will be ongoing 
for staff and the wider public to highlight Council performance on climate 
change, to provide information on project progress, successes and any 
new initiatives. 
5.2.7 Resources
The Council General Fund Revenue Budget and Capital Programme 
contains a funding commitment towards achieving net zero emission 
targets, with funding for initiatives that will support the development of 
net zero and climate adaptation priorities with initiatives including fleet 
replacement, active travel, electric vehicle charging, energy efficiency, Electric van – Council fleet
Hydrogen dual fuel road sweeperAberdeen City Council  I  Council Climate Change Plan 2021 - 202520heating replacement, property refurbishment and improvements, district 
heating and hydrogen projects.
A number of funding streams have already been accessed for the 
development and delivery of projects under this plan, including funding 
from:
 ♦European Regional Development Fund for various projects 
relevant to the Buildings, Mobility and Other operations themes.
 ♦Energy Savings Trust, on behalf of Transport Scotland to support 
the fleet transition.
 ♦Low Carbon Infrastructure Programme Grant to support district 
heating expansion.
 ♦Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (BEIS), 
Social Housing Decarbonisation Fund Demonstrator to support 
housing retrofit.
It is anticipated that further funding streams will become available in 
coming years and new grant opportunities will be pursued during the 
course of this plan. In some cases, action may result in reduced costs 
and/ or income generation, presenting further opportunities to re-align 
budgets.  
In future, Climate Change Reports for Scottish Government will ask 
for narrative on; “How will the body align its spending plans and use 
of resources to contribute to reducing emissions and delivering it’s 
emission reduction targets.” Guidance on the reporting requirements is 
anticipated.
Where any additional actions are identified for the Project Register, 
financial options for delivery, will be developed. The delivery of this 
plan will link to the budget setting process and the development of our 
carbon budget.
Our operational projects include a number of feasibility studies, 
assessments and pilots which aim to establish the most cost-effective 
solutions for any subsequent roll out of further action.
In addition, actions including our Zero Emission Fleet Programme are 
progressing with a number of north and north east partners, to unlock 
the potential for economies of scale in procurement.6. Themes
6.1 Buildings
Current context
Our buildings including offices, libraries, schools and depots vary in 
range of age, build, size and condition. The majority of Council buildings 
and our Council housing are currently fuelled by gas and electricity, 
although the Council has installed biomass; solar PVs and heat pumps 
on various Council buildings there is much to learn on cost effective 
application for different buildings types, age, size and location. However, 
existing connections to district heating are providing low cost, lower 
carbon heat.
Figure 9: Emissions from Council buildings
Emissions from energy use were 33,560 (tCo2e) in 2015/16. 72% of the 
reported footprint.
By 2019/20 emissions from building operations had reduced by 31%
Emissions tCO2e - Buildings
20000
15000
10000
5000
0
15/16     16/17     17/18      18/19     19/20
 Water    Gas    Oil    ElectricityEmissions from gas, oil and electricity 
have reduced since the baseline. While 
emissions from water are the lowest, they 
have shown an upward trend. The greatest 
reduction was from electricity, partly due to 
a greener national grid. 
We have taken a number of actions, 26 
public buildings and sheltered housing 
complexes have been connected to 
Combined Heat and Power Networks. 
We have taken measures to improve 
energy efficiency in Council buildings, 
through our Condition and Suitability 
Programme. Green roofs are installed in 2 
of our buildings reducing energy demand 
and slowing down run off.Aberdeen City Council  I  Council Climate Change Plan 2021 - 202521Council Housing is not included in our reporting footprint but we do 
monitor EPC ratings. Our actions have included connections for 3,603 
council flats and houses to CHP, as well as Council spending priorities 
to reduce heat loss and improve energy efficiency for our Council 
housing.
Drivers
National Local
 ♦Energy Performance 
Certificates (EPC), to meet 
requirements, EPC’s are 
produced to show energy 
efficiency ratings, for Council 
buildings (over 1,000m2). 
 ♦Energy Efficiency Standard 
for Social Housing (EESSH2) 
milestone is for social housing 
to meet an EPC Band B by 
December 2032, within limits of 
cost, technology, consent.  
 ♦Fuel Poverty (Targets, 
Definitions and Strategy) 
(Scotland) Act 2019.
 ♦The Future of Energy in 
Scotland: Energy Strategy. ♦The Council Property Asset 
Management Policy includes 
key principles of sustainability 
and reducing carbon emissions.
 ♦The Council Building 
Performance Policy and 
Checklist set sustainability 
standards for Council new build 
and refurbishment projects.
 ♦The Local Housing Strategy 
(2018 -2023) has targets and an 
objective for fuel poverty.
Emerging changes to legislation and regulation will require a 
transition to renewable and low carbon heating; set requirements 
for district heating; and increase energy efficiency standards. 
Proposed requirements for all local authorities to produce an area-
based Local Heat and Energy Strategy (LHEES).
Project priorities to 2025
The Buildings theme sets out information under 4 outcomes, alongside 
these are range of activities that will be delivered through this theme. A 
full list of activities for the theme is in our Project Register.Outcomes Activities will include:
Reduced 
energy 
demand
An increase 
in energy 
efficiency 
and reducing 
energy 
demand, to 
avoid a waste 
of energy 
in the first 
instance.  ♦Project DORIC, a “whole house” retrofit 
demonstrator project, in 100 existing council 
properties to improve fabric and energy efficiency.
 ♦Learning about the standards, timescales, cost 
of retrofit to inform the development of a future 
retrofit programme. 
 ♦Using smart modelling software and infrared 
survey techniques to better target resources, 
decisions, monitoring and analysis of energy use. 
 ♦Installing energy efficiency measures, (window, 
door and heating replacements, property 
insulation). 
 ♦Replacement of lighting to LED in Marischal 
College.
 ♦Developing plans to optimise Council assets, as 
ways of working change.
 ♦Establishing plans to meet EESSH2 standards for 
energy efficiency in Council Housing.
Low carbon/ 
renewable 
energy
A transition 
to locally 
produced 
renewable 
energy 
sources, 
hydrogen or 
low carbon 
technology 
to supply 
remaining 
energy needs. ♦Installing further renewables including; heat pumps 
and solar PV. 
 ♦A trial of battery storage. 
 ♦Connecting identified schools, public buildings and 
new Council housing to onsite CHP energy centres 
and expanding existing CHP networks. 
 ♦A Torry Heat Network for some of our existing 
homes. 
 ♦Links to heat from the Energy from Waste plant for 
a number of our heat networks. 
 ♦Feasibility study on use of hydrogen for heat.
 ♦Establishing cost effective solutions for a range of 
building types; and planning scalable solutions to 
phase out fossil fuels.Aberdeen City Council  I  Council Climate Change Plan 2021 - 202522Increased 
resilience
Resilience 
of Council 
buildings 
and homes 
is improved 
through 
design, 
management 
and 
maintenance. ♦Installing approved upgrades to roofs, external 
rendering, gutters and downpipes. 
 ♦Specifying water efficiency measures and 
appliances.
 ♦Establishing wildflower and food growing areas; 
and installing green roofs on external storage in 
new Council housing developments.
 ♦Making use of the grounds around our buildings 
for nature-based solutions, to reduce flood risk and 
benefit nature.
 ♦Ensuring that main services and plant rooms 
servicing buildings are not exposed to flooding 
risks and locations of new energy centres are 
selected based on future expansion and demand 
for the wider area. 
Improved 
standards
Meet new 
and revised 
legislation, 
regulation and 
standards, 
going beyond 
minimum 
requirements, 
where 
practical.  ♦Achieving our Council House Building programme, 
of around 2,000 homes. 
 ♦Designing 4 new schools to achieve EPC A 
rating, be fibre ready and with outside space 
for biodiversity, food growing and natural play, 
learning.
 ♦Trial of new Net Zero New Build Standards and 
integrating the requirements into our policy.
 ♦Keeping pace with emerging energy policy, 
legislation, building regulations and new and 
revised standards. 
6.2 Mobility Theme
Current context
Our fleet of more than 520 vehicles includes cars, small, medium and 
large vans, mini buses, lorries, tipper trucks, refuse collection and street 
cleaning vehicles, to support the breadth and type of Council activity.  
Figure 10: Emissions from fleet and staff travel
Emissions from Council’s fleet were 3774.9 (tCO2e) and from staff 
travel 469.4 (tCO2e) in 2015/16.
By 2019/20 the Council had reduced emissions from fleet by 12.7% 
and from staff travel by 18%.
Emissions tCO2e - Mobility
5000
4000
3000
2000
2000
1000
0
15/16     16/17     17/18     18/19     19/20
 Staff Travel    Fleet8% of our reported emissions are from 
fleet. They have reduced since the 
baseline year, although there has been 
limited change in the last 3 years. 
We have already introduced low 
emission vehicles to our fleet, including 
20 electric vans, a sweeper and mini 
digger, 3 hydrogen cars, 5 diesel/ 
hydrogen vehicles, 40 hybrid vehicles.
The main source of emissions from staff 
travel is from staff business mileage, 
with essential and casual car users 
travelling over 919,704 km in 2019/20. 
Staff have access to pool bikes and to 
electric and hydrogen vehicles, through 
the Co-Wheels Car Club.
A Staff Travel Plan Survey is completed around every 2 years. We 
do not currently calculate emissions from our staff commute. Pre 
pandemic around 19% of staff walked or cycled to work and another 
19% used public transport. Online systems now provide the means for 
many staff to work from home.Aberdeen City Council  I  Council Climate Change Plan 2021 - 202523Drivers
National Local
 ♦The Road to Zero Industrial 
Strategy (UK)
 ♦Transport (Scotland) Act 2019 
 ♦National Transport Strategy 
(NTS2) 2020 includes the 
priority to take climate action: 
reduce emissions from the 
transport sector; adapt to the 
effects of climate change; and 
promote greener, cleaner 
choices.  ♦Regional Transport Strategy – 
2013. A new strategy Nestrans 
2040 is in development.
 ♦Local Transport Strategy (2016-
2021) includes the objective; 
to contribute to Aberdeen’s 
carbon emissions targets 
and develop climate resilient 
infrastructure.
 ♦The Strategic Infrastructure 
Plan: Energy Transition includes 
a goal for Sustainable Mobility.
 ♦Aberdeen Hydrogen Strategy 
and Action Plan 2015-2025.
 ♦Electric Vehicle Framework for 
Aberdeen.
 ♦Aberdeen Active Travel Action 
Plan.
 ♦Aberdeen Sustainable Urban 
Mobility Plan (SUMP).
Project priorities to 2025
The Mobility theme sets out information under 4 outcomes and these 
include a range of activities that will be delivered through this theme. A 
full list of activities for the theme is in our Project Register. Outcomes Activities will include:
Zero emission 
fleet
Phase out 
the need for 
new fossil 
fuelled small 
vehicles by 
2025 and for 
larger vehicles 
by 2029, 
switching to 
electric and 
hydrogen 
powered fleet 
vehicles. ♦Conducting a Fleet Review to establish the 
timeline, key barriers and opportunities to switch 
from a fossil fuelled fleet to alternative fuels. 
 ♦Planning a conversion of larger fleet to hydrogen, 
where practical.
 ♦Testing and deploying a hydrogen fuel cell refuse 
truck. 
 ♦Converting 42 of our refuse collection vehicles to 
dual fuel, hydrogen/ diesel, and assess vehicles, 
where it is practical to convert to hydrogen.
 ♦Fleet optimisation, analysing fleet vehicle size and 
numbers for operational needs.
 ♦A phased procurement of electric vehicles (EV) for 
smaller fleet (cars & small vans) by 2025. 
 ♦Budget is allocated to fleet replacement, we 
will also pursue external funding and work 
collaboratively for cost effective procurement. 
Low carbon 
fleet infra-
structure 
Plan, test and 
implement 
an expanded 
EV charging 
and hydrogen 
refuelling in-
frastructure for 
Council fleet.  ♦Assessing suitable locations, access requirements 
and maximum charging capacity for EV charging. 
 ♦Planning and implementing a phased installation 
of electric vehicle charge points at Council offices 
and identified locations.
 ♦Identifying opportunities for the use of renewables 
(eg solar canopies) for fleet electric vehicle 
charging.
 ♦Partnership working on a Hydrogen Fleet 
Development and Infrastructure Study to 
determine the overall infrastructure requirements 
for further public sector hydrogen fleet. 
 ♦Examining opportunities for on-site renewable 
energy generation or the use of energy storage to 
support charging for Council fleet.Aberdeen City Council  I  Council Climate Change Plan 2021 - 202524Reduced 
emissions 
from staff 
travel 
Increased 
staff uptake 
of active, 
sustainable 
and alternative 
travel choices, 
reducing the 
need for travel 
through use of 
technology. ♦Review of procedure and incentives that can 
facilitate and reduce the need for staff travel.
 ♦Updating the staff travel policy. 
 ♦Completing a grey fleet review (use of employee 
owned vehicles).
 ♦Expanding the number of Car Club vehicles 
available to staff, including access for heavy users 
of grey miles.
 ♦Expanding secure cycle storage in Council 
buildings & car parks.
 ♦Promoting active travel options (staff & schools) – 
cycling and walking.
Resilient 
design and 
management - 
infrastructure
Ensure climate 
adaptation is 
considered 
at all stages 
of project 
development, 
management 
and 
maintenance 
of the transport 
infrastructure 
we maintain 
and manage. ♦Increasing use of permeable surfaces, Sustainable 
Urban Drainage systems and swales in our car 
parks and around our buildings.
 ♦Bringing culverted watercourses to the surface 
and reducing hard engineering in existing open 
channels.
6.3 Other Operations Theme
Current context
Figure 11 – Emissions from street lighting and internal waste
Emissions from street lighting were 8,150 tCO2e and from internal 
waste 213 tCO2e in 2015/16.
In 2019/20 emissions from street lighting had reduced by 
around 58% 
Emissions tCO2e - 
Other operations
10000
8000
6000
4000
2000
0
15/16      16/17      17/18      18/19     19/20
 Street Lighting   Internal wasteEmissions from street lighting form just 
under 18% of our reported footprint. 
They have reduced substantially 
through a greener national grid and 
progress with our LED street lighting 
programme which is about 60% 
complete. Internal waste is a smaller 
proportion of our emissions. 637 
tonnes of mixed recycling, food waste, 
glass, waste electronic and electrical 
equipment were recycled from 
Council premises in 2019/20. Although 
recycling of waste streams including 
special waste, oil, construction waste, 
green waste takes place, data is 
not currently reported as part of our 
organisation footprint.
Helping to increase resilience, our actions have also included the 
development of a wetland area at a part of Seaton Park prone to 
drainage issues and flooding. This included the planting of 210,000 
trees in the city, through the Tree for every Citizen initiative. Both 
initiatives, as well as helping to adapt, have also made a contribution 
to biodiversity.Aberdeen City Council  I  Council Climate Change Plan 2021 - 202525Drivers
National Local
 ♦The Council must meet a 
Biodiversity Duty under the 
Nature Conservation (Scotland) 
Act.
 ♦Requirements under the 
Planning (Scotland) Act 2019 
for a Forestry and Woodland 
Strategy.
 ♦National Infrastructure 
Investment Plan.
 ♦Waste (Scotland) Regulations 
2012 set a mandatory 
requirement for recycling from 
Council premises (for paper, 
plastic, metal, glass; and where 
relevant, food waste). 
 ♦Targets for a reduction in total 
waste arising in Scotland by 
15% against 2011 levels; and a 
reduction in food waste by 33% 
against 2013 levels.Aberdeen Open Space 
Strategy includes an objective 
to, “Maximise opportunities to 
mitigate and adapt to climate 
change and further biodiversity.
Aberdeen Nature Conservation 
Strategy recognises that 
biodiversity loss and climate 
change are interlinked. 
North East Flood Risk 
Management Plan.
The Strategic Infrastructure 
Plan includes priorities for tree 
planting. 
Council Internal Waste 
Implementation Plan and Policy.
Emerging drivers include proposed legislation restricting supply of 
single use plastics; and on the circular economy.
Project priorities to 2025
The Other Operations theme sets out information under 4 outcomes, 
alongside these are range of activities that will be delivered through this 
theme. A full list of activities for the theme is in our Project Register.Outcomes Activities will include:
Upgraded 
street lighting
Reduced 
energy 
consumption 
from street 
lighting. ♦Completing the LED street lighting replacement to 
replace old inefficient and expensive street lighting 
with lower energy LED units. 
 ♦Developing further phases of an Intelligent Lighting 
Systems Programme to control, dim and remotely 
monitor faults and support the control of street 
lighting.
 ♦Extending the LED replacement programme to 
include lit signs and bollards.
Increase in 
nature based 
solutions 
(Council land)
Development 
of blue, green 
infrastructure 
on Council 
owned land 
for water 
management 
and 
biodiversity. ♦Mapping blue/ green infrastructure areas 
suitable for installation and retrofit of blue green 
infrastructure, through partnership work on a 
Sustainable Growth Agreement.
 ♦Testing the installation and retrofit of blue green 
infrastructure (BGI) on the land we manage, 
including work as a partner in the EU project 
BEGIN (Blue Green Infrastructure through Social 
Innovation) project. 
 ♦Identifying sites on Council land to create 
naturalised grasslands and wildflower meadows. 
Increasing biodiversity, contributing to carbon 
stores and carbon savings from intensive grass 
cutting.
 ♦Establishing strategic priorities and actions to 
protect and enhance our trees, forests and 
woodlands. 
 ♦Expanding a programme of tree planting on 
Council owned land. Identifying a diversity of 
species, that are resilient to climate change.Aberdeen City Council  I  Council Climate Change Plan 2021 - 202526Water man-
agement
Prepared for 
the impacts 
to the Council 
from changes 
in rainfall. ♦Installing CCTV and/or gauges as proactive 
measures to enable faster Council response and 
reduce the risk and impact from flooding. 
 ♦Developing the Denburn re-naturalisation project  
to identify natural ways of providing flood storage 
areas in the Denburn Valley.
 ♦Developing flood risk management and surface 
water management plans.
 ♦Increasing rainwater capture for Council growing 
spaces, to reduce mains water use.
Internal waste 
minimisation 
and 
sustainable 
catering 
A reduction 
in waste 
generated 
from Council 
buildings and 
operations. 
A reduced 
carbon 
footprint from 
our catering. ♦Improving monitoring and measuring of internal 
waste streams.
 ♦Supporting, promoting and integrating circular 
economy principles of reduce, reuse, repair, 
recycle and designing out waste tying in with our 
procurement process.
 ♦Reviewing the Council events guidance to reflect 
net zero targets, with a focus on waste generated 
from events.
 ♦Transition to online systems to reduce paper 
consumption and waste.
 ♦Use of local sustainable, seasonable, fresh and 
Marine Stewardship Council products in Council 
catering.
 ♦Reviewing and replacing old catering equipment 
with energy efficient models, making reductions in 
water, electric, gas consumption.
6.4 Leadership & Governance Theme
Current context
One of our enabling themes, being delivered through the Leadership 
and Governance sub-group to ensure climate change is mainstreamed 
into our Corporate Governance. We will strengthen the integration of 
climate change into our strategies, policies, and decision making, so the 
Council is making a strategic and operational contribution to addressing 
climate change. 
This work is building on existing actions already in place to embed 
climate change. Our Committee Report template requires information 
on environmental and climate risks, to help inform member decision 
making. Our capital project strategic documentation (outline business 
case and full business case), includes an environmental management 
section, which requires carbon emissions and climate adaptation to 
be considered in proposed capital projects. Strategic Environmental 
Assessment (SEA) is applied to the development of relevant plans, 
programmes and strategies where required.  
Addressing climate risk, climate change is included in the Council’s 
Corporate Risk Register, with regular updates provided to the Risk 
Board.  Annual updates of the risk management system, including 
the corporate risk register, is provided to the Audit, Risk and Scrutiny 
Committee. 
In addition, we report annually on our performance in reducing 
emissions and adapting to climate change, through a statutory Climate 
Change Report and our Statutory Performance Indicator on Emissions 
Management.
Our consultation and legislation trackers help to ensure that the 
Council is aware of, prepared for and ready to respond to new law 
and national policy and to the scale and pace of legislative change.Aberdeen City Council  I  Council Climate Change Plan 2021 - 202527Drivers
National Local
 ♦The Climate Change (Duties of 
Public Bodies: Reporting Re-
quirements) (Scotland) Amend-
ment Order 2020 means future 
Climate Change Reports will ask 
for narrative on how the Council 
align its spending plans and use 
of resources to contribute to re-
ducing emissions and delivering 
it’s emission reduction targets.  ♦Joint Procurement Strategy, 
Aberdeen City Council, 
Aberdeenshire Council and The 
Highland Council 2017 – 2022
 ♦Aberdeen City Council, 
Sustainable Procurement and 
Community Benefits Policy
Project priorities to 2025
The Leadership and Governance theme sets out information under 4 
outcomes, alongside these are range of activities that will be delivered 
through this theme. A full list of activities for the theme is in our Project 
Register.
Outcomes Activities will include:
Improved data 
management 
Arrangements 
in place to 
capture and 
analyse data to 
help facilitate 
the delivery of 
our net zero 
target. ♦Developing a platform for collating, monitoring, 
and reporting emissions and adaptation data. 
We require reliable and accurate data to inform 
the Council’s Planning Cycle and continuous 
improvement in environmental performance. 
 ♦Developing and implementing a carbon budget 
for the Council; allocating an agreed fair portion to 
Council Functions and Clusters; and building links to 
our Commissioning Intentions. 
 ♦Completing an annual review of adaptation 
progress against the Adaptation Capability 
Framework.Climate risk 
management
Climate risks 
affecting the 
Council are 
assessed and 
integrated 
in the Risk 
Management 
Framework  ♦Mainstreaming climate risk assessment at 
operational level and put in place appropriate levels 
of controls to protect Council assets and services.
 ♦Monitoring for change in vulnerability and exposure 
to climate change. 
 ♦Building staff understanding of the consequences 
of climate impacts on the Council. 
Climate  
considerations 
embedded
Climate 
change is 
incorporated 
into Council 
practices 
and  decision-
making 
processes.  ♦Ensuring climate change priorities are embedded in 
templates for future strategies and policies. 
 ♦Strengthening inclusion of climate considerations in 
the Committee Report Author Guidance and in the 
Project Management process and templates.
 ♦Ongoing review of the Scheme of Governance to 
reflect the targets and commitments of this plan.
 ♦Monitoring any new or revised legislation which 
may impact the outcomes of this plan.
Strategic 
Resource 
Allocation 
Through 
strategic 
resource 
allocation, use 
our resources 
to contribute 
our net zero 
target. ♦Strategic allocation of resources against those 
activities that will help us secure a net zero Council 
and climate resilient Council by 2045. 
 ♦Integration of the Climate Plan into the Planning 
Cycle, to inform spending plans and use of 
resources.
 ♦Identify, examine and strengthen delivery of the 
Council’s climate priorities, within our procurement 
processes and identify how we can support our 
suppliers in contributing to the Council’s net zero 
target.Aberdeen City Council  I  Council Climate Change Plan 2021 - 202528
6.5 Awareness & Behaviour Change Theme
Current  context
The Awareness and Behaviour Change sub-group has been actively 
involved in wider theme discussions to understand the staff, knowledge, 
skills and competencies that will be required to deliver this plan. The 
Council has taken a number of awareness actions already including: 
Participation in Earth Hour and Climate Week North East, with various 
awareness raising activities open to staff.
Supporting uptake of sustainable travel, the Council operates an 
employee benefit scheme which includes incentives such as a Cycle to 
Work scheme and a Bus to Work scheme.
Run staff short “Pitstop” training sessions on sustainability; and energy 
and climate. Although these have a limited reach and are currently 
designed for face to face delivery.
To help inform the development of our Green Champions scheme, a 
placement project with an MSc student from the University of Aberdeen 
took place. Carrying out background research on similar staff schemes 
in the UK and a staff survey was completed.  
Workshops delivering Climate Ready Lesson Plans were held in 3 city 
schools and flooding workshops and creative learning have taken place 
with a further school to support flood management work.
Many of our pupils are actively involved in learning on climate change 
and the environment, 20 city schools have achieved EcoSchool Green 
Flag Awards.Drivers
National Local
 ♦Changes to Climate Change 
Reporting will require public 
bodies in Scotland to provide 
information on how they publish 
or otherwise make available 
progress towards achieving 
emission reduction targets. ♦LOIP Improvement Measures 
include: No. of public sector 
workforce ambassadors of low 
carbon living and working; and 
No. of people taking part in 
environment/ sustainability 
educational activities.
 ♦The Council Delivery Plan 
2020/21 includes “% of 
workforce completing Climate 
Adaption Awareness Training 
within the Council ”.  
 ♦This theme is also relevant 
to the Council Statutory 
Performance Indicator, work 
done to encourage and support 
sustainable development.
Project priorities to 2025
The Awareness and Behaviour Change theme sets out information 
under 4 outcomes, alongside these are range of activities that will be 
delivered through this theme. A full list of activities for the theme is in our 
Project Register.Aberdeen City Council  I  Council Climate Change Plan 2021 - 202529Outcomes Activities will include:
Greater 
awareness 
(staff and 
elected 
members)
Staff are 
aware of the 
Council’s 
climate 
action and 
commitments 
and how they 
relate to their 
work. ♦Producing an Internal Communication Plan, to 
raise staff awareness, build knowledge and 
understanding of actions and progress on the 
delivery of the plan .
 ♦Using a range of communication channels to make 
information accessible, consistent and relevant,  
including a Green Workplace area on the staff 
intranet; Leadership Forum events for senior 
managers; and staff webinars.
 ♦Linking with other themes under the plan to gather 
and promote success stories.
 ♦Promoting and participating in wider climate 
awareness initiatives including local and national 
Climate Weeks and the global Earth Hour initiative.
 ♦Raising awareness of ambitious corporate 
programmes taking place towards net zero and 
climate resilience. 
Capability 
building
Staff have 
knowledge 
and 
understanding 
on climate 
change; 
and where 
necessary, 
are upskilled 
to support 
actions.   ♦Establishing an internal Climate Change 
Training Plan, covering staff workplace skills and 
professional development. 
 ♦Working with other themes to identify any relevant 
specialised training requirements, as projects 
develop. 
 ♦Developing an online generic staff training module 
on climate change on our training platform ACC 
Learn. 
 ♦Upgrading the Council Capability Framework to 
include climate leadership measures at all levels. Increased 
participation
Participation 
of staff in the 
design of 
relevant policy 
and process; 
and increased 
uptake of 
sustainable 
choices.   ♦Grouping and promoting existing employee 
benefits relevant to sustainability and explore any 
further opportunities for the scheme.
 ♦Signposting to any sustainability initiatives, schemes 
and grants available nationally relevant to the 
outcomes of this plan. 
 ♦Taking the corporate approach to holistic behaviour 
change and apply it to energy and climate change.
 ♦Connecting with our Leadership & Governance 
theme to ensure staff understand any Council’s 
changes to policy and procedure as a result of this 
plan and how it may affect them.
 ♦Developing and launching a Green Champions 
scheme to empower staff involvement.
Wider 
engagement 
Our climate 
data is 
accessible. 
Schools are 
informed on 
our actions 
and are 
engaged 
in climate 
activity. ♦Publishing and making the Council’s climate change 
data accessible. Including production of visual icons 
and infographics on progress towards targets.
 ♦Informing city schools and teachers about Council 
commitments, actions to address climate change 
and any actions relevant to individual schools. 
 ♦Supporting learning on climate change, 
encouraging participation in initiatives such as 
Climate Ready Classrooms and the EcoSchools 
programme.
 ♦Examining opportunities for the views and ideas 
of pupils to be heard and integrated into the 
development of relevant theme actions.
Aberdeen City Council  I  Council Climate Change Plan 2021 - 2025307. Enable Development Goals (SDGs) 
7.1 Our actions align with the 17 UN Sustainable Development 
Goals, including: 
Generating clean energy and improving energy 
efficiency of Council housing, help to alleviate 
fuel poverty and to improve climate resilience for 
housing.
Expanding use of blue green infrastructure on 
Council land. Developing spaces for food growing 
spaces through our new build. Increased tree 
cover could include the planting of crop trees and 
orchards. Capability building of staff to grow food in 
the workplace. 
Expanded use of blue green infrastructure can 
contribute to health and well-being of staff and 
service users. Increased tree cover and clean 
energy generation can contribute to improved air 
quality and help to improve health.
Actions to support wider engagement with schools 
will support global citizenship education and 
education for sustainable development. Improved 
building standards and resilience of school assets 
could enhance the school environment for learning 
and reduce the risks of education being disrupted 
by temperature or weather impacts.
Covered by the Integrated Impact Assessment. 
Improving water use efficiency through the 
effective use of resources and the expanded 
use of blue green infrastructure will contribute 
to protecting and restoring water related 
ecosystems, rivers and aquifers. Increased tree 
cover on Council land will also support the water 
environment. 
Generating clean energy, extend the heat 
network, upgrade street lighting, increase the 
share of renewable energy in the energy mix and 
improve energy efficiency of Council housing and 
other buildings will contribute to universal access 
to affordable, reliable and modern energy services.
Encouraging effective use of resources and low-
carbon enhancements to infrastructure will support 
and encourage local business to endeavour to 
decouple economic growth from environmental 
degradation.
Encouraging the effective use of resources, 
low-carbon enhancements to infrastructure and 
expanding the use of blue-green infrastructure will 
‘lead by example’ and support and encourage local 
stakeholders and researchers to further innovate. Aberdeen City Council  I  Council Climate Change Plan 2021 - 202531
Increasing energy efficiency of Council housing 
and effective use of resources will help to alleviate 
fuel poverty and contribute to progressively 
achieving and sustaining income growth of those 
facing most socio-economic challenges. 
Improving housing quality, protecting and 
enhancing Council owned open spaces, resilient 
design of roads and paths, reducing losses from 
weather impacts and improving air quality all 
contribute to a sustainable city.
Minimising waste, encouraging the effective use 
of resources in support of a circular economy, 
improving data capture, encouraging sustainable 
public procurement and the wider engagement 
with schools and staff training will all increase 
greater awareness the links with climate action.
Reducing emissions, increasing the resilience 
and build standards of Council assets, climate 
risk management and embedding climate 
considerations into Council activities are all 
contributing to city-wide climate action.
Improving water use efficiency through effective 
use of resources and the expanded use of blue 
green infrastructure will contribute to protecting 
and restoring water related ecosystems, rivers and 
aquifers. Increased tree cover on Council land will 
also support the water environment. These actions 
will in turn contribute to water quality at the coast.
Increasing tree cover will contribute to overall 
biodiversity gain and potentially support and 
protect habitats for wildlife.
Developing effective, accountable and transparent 
governance of the Council’s climate actions, 
benchmarking and public reporting of progress 
contribute to strong institutions and a process in 
which people feel able to participate.  
Aiming to embed climate considerations into 
other programmes, plans and strategies will 
lead to improved policy coherence and present 
opportunities to engage further with multi-
stakeholder partnerships.
CCCP/BR/24/08/2021