Sustainable Development and 
Environmental Efficiency Strategy 
(SDEES)Foreword 
Bedford Borough Council is committed to becoming a more environmentally efficient and resilient organisation. 
It also remains committed to supporting local communities and businesses in the Borough to increase their  
own efficiency and resilience.
Explaining our continued approach to promoting environmental sustainability, we are pleased to introduce 
Bedford Borough Council’s Sustainable Development and Environmental Efficiency Strategy. This document  
sets out, through a series of key strategic priorities, how the Borough will achieve its ongoing vision for the 
authority and the wider Borough. Through the delivery of an annual action plan, we will demonstrate what  
 the Council and its partners are doing to meet these priorities in a cost effective, resource efficient manner.
This strategy will be delivered against a backdrop of significant reductions in funding for local government.  
The delivery of the strategy will contribute to both the Council’s Corporate Plan 2017-2021, which will 
help ensure that Bedford Borough continues to be seen as the place to grow and has a good quality local 
Environment, as well as the Council’s business transformation programme which aims to increase financial 
efficiency, whilst maintaining services and empowering local residents and communities in the Borough.
Dave Hodgson  
Mayor of BedfordPhilip Simpkins  
Chief Executive
3Table of Contents 
1. Introduction p.4
2. Our Goals p.8
3.  C ontext p.10
3.1 The  Interntional Framework  p.11
3.2 National drivers and legislation p.12
3.3 Local drivers  p.15
4. What we have achieved so far p.18
4.1 Reducing C02 Emissions  p.19
4.2 Biomass case study  p.20
4.3 Evaporative cooling case study  p.21
4.4 Bedford International Athletic Stadium Case Study p.22
4.5 Hydro Power Case Study  p.23
4.6 Mayor’s Climate Change Fund Case Study  p.24
4.7 Other Projects  p.24
p.27
p.285.Our strategic priorities
6.Implementation and monitoring of the strategy
Action Plan SECTION ONE
Introduction15
Sustainable Development and Environmental Efficiency Strategy
Introduction
The world is adding greenhouse gases to the atmosphere faster than 
ever before. The International Energy Agency has warned that to avoid 
‘catastrophic and irreversible’ global warming this trend must be reversed 
quickly. To continue following this path would mean around a 50% chance of a rise in global average temperature of more than 4ºC by 2100. 
An increase in global temperatures of this magnitude would increase 
the likelihood of some extreme weather events:
•Extremely hot days and heat waves will increase in frequency,
magnitude and length. Conservative projections estimate that
a 1-in-20 year hottest day is expected to become a 1-in-2 year
event by the end of the century.
•Longer dry periods will be accompanied by heavier rains.Comparable projections indicate that a 1-in-20 year rainfall
is likely to become a 1-in-5 to 1-in-15 year event.
•Mean sea level rises will contribute to upward trends in
extreme coastal high water levels in the future which may
be exacerbated by more intense storm systems.The latest Intergovernmental panel on climate change (IPPC) report in 2018, states that we are already seeing the consequences of 1ºC of global warming through more extreme weather, rising sea levels and retreating 
Arctic sea ice. If temperatures continue to rise at the current pace, by 
2100 global sea level rise would be 10cm higher if temperatures increase 
above 1.5-2 degrees and the Arctic Ocean would be free of sea ice in 
summer once every 10 years (compared to once every century). Limiting the warming to 1.5 degrees, rather than the 2degrees agreed at the Paris 
convention in 2015, would enable people and ecosystems time to adapt 
and reduce the risks of complete loss of environments such as coral reefs. However, limiting global warming to 1.5 degrees requires ‘rapid and far 
reaching’ transitions in land, energy, industry, buildings, transport and 
cities. Emissions of carbon dioxide would need to fall by around 45%  from 2010 levels by 2030, reaching ‘net zero’ around 2050. 
The UK, through the climate change act in 2008, is going some way to 
achieve this with the aim to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by at least 80% by 2050, so far achieving 42% reduction compared to 1990 levels.  
The UK government’s Green Growth Strategy 2017, which underpins a 
large part of this strategy, sets out a number of key obejectives to drive down the carbon emissions whilst also investing in the green economy. 
At a local level Bedford is committed to playing its part to encourage 
actions to reduce its contribution to, as well as build a resilient community against, the impacts of climate change. The Council has already delivered 
53% reduction in carbon emissions since 2009/10 and continues to 
deliver energy efficiency projects. By delivering this strategy, the Council demonstrates its commitment to ensuring that climate change mitigation Sustainable Development and Environmental Efficiency Strategy
50% chance of  
a rise in global average 
temperature of more than  
4ºC by 21001-in-20 year hottest day 
is expected to become a  
1-in-2 year event  
by the end of the century1-in-20  
year rainfall   
is likely become a   
1-in-5 to 1-in-15  
year eventUK Climate Change  
Act 2008 aims to 
reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions by at     
least 80% by 2050
so far achieving 42% reduction 
compared to 1990 levelsUKbedford is committed  
to playing its part to encourage 
actions to reduce  
its contribution to, as well  
as build a resilient  
community against,  
the impacts of  
climate change.
Bedford Borough Council  
has already delivered   
53%  reduction in carbon 
emissions since 2009/10  
and continues to deliver  
energy efficiency projectsIf temperatures continue to rise 
and increase above 1.5 - 2 degrees
RISING
SEA LEVELat the current pace,   
by 2100  global sea level   
rise would be  10cm higher 
The A rctic Ocean would be  
free of sea ice   
in summer once  
every 10 years   
(compared to once every century) 
+1.5 0+2.0 0
DAY HOTTEST 7
Sustainable Development and Environmental Efficiency Strategy
and adaptation actions are implemented across the Council’s estate, 
the staff and through the services it provides and communicated to the 
community and businesses of the Borough to ensure that a joined-up 
approach is achieved.
The Sustainable Development and Environmental Efficiency Strategy 
sets out how the Council will continue to lead by example to increase 
its environmental efficiency and resilience, whilst also encouraging and 
supporting local communities and businesses in the Borough to do the same. The strategy was developed in collaboration with service areas 
across the authority as well as other partner organisations; all of which 
are committed to delivering local projects that will help to achieve local, regional and national targets.
The purpose of this strategy is to define our vision for environmental 
efficiency and resilience; building on the work we have already completed to date, and to then outline the strategic priorities that will help us to 
deliver it. It also determines how, through work across the Council and 
work with external partners, we will meet new challenges faced in the future.
The strategy initially explores the reasons why it continues to remain 
crucial for us take action to protect and improve the local environment, whilst recognising our achievements and successes to date. The action 
plan, which should be read in conjunction with this strategy, demonstrates 
how strategic priorities will be delivered in future by defining a series of key actions; to be implemented by both the authority and external partners. Drawing on the positive outcomes from previous strategies, the Council aims to create a robust and inclusive strategy that incorporates the Council’s main aims and objectives. 
Key environmental strategies that have been brought together to create 
this one, comprehensive strategy are:
•Climate Change Strategy 2012/13-2015/16
•Carbon Management Plan 2010/11-2014/15
•Water Strategy 2015/16
•Affordable Warmth Strategy 2013-2016
Climate Change Strategy 
2012 /13 - 2015 /16 Carbon Management Plan 
2010/11 – 2014/15
Environmental and Sustainable Communities
working withWatt a difference
Switch off and save
Water Strategy
Environment & Sustainable Communities2014/15 - 2016/17
Working withSECTION TWO
Our Goals2Sustainable Development and Environmental Efficiency Strategy2. Our Goals
Bedford Borough Council will:  
  Achieve resource efficiencies and cost savings
  Be more resilient against increasing energy prices
  Enhance and protect the local environment
  Empower local communities and businesses
  Plan for and protect against future change
  Improve quality of life for all 
  Create long term business value for the Council
9SECTION THREE
Context311
Sustainable Development and Environmental Efficiency Strategy
Context 
3.1 The International Framework
In order to meet its international legal commitments to reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions (under the Kyoto Protocol), the UK government 
introduced the Climate Change Act in 2008. This set out legally binding 
targets to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by at least 34% by 2020 
and by 80% by 2050 against a 1990 baseline. It also introduced a series 
of carbon budgets which provide legally binding limits on the amount of 
emissions that may be produced in successive five-year periods, as well 
as placing a requirement upon the Government to complete a National 
Adaptation Plan. 
Article 4 of the European Renewable Energy Directive (2009/28/EC)  
sets a target for the UK to meet 15% of total energy consumption  
from renewable sources by 2020. In 2010 the UK Government published 
the ‘UK National Renewable Energy Action Plan’ to demonstrate how  
it would meet this target. The EU Energy Performance of Buildings  
Directive (2002/91/EC) requires compliance with Article 7 (Energy 
Performance Certificates), Article 8 (Inspection of boilers) and  
Article 9 (Inspection of air conditioning systems).
Under the EU Waste Framework Directive, the UK is committed to recycle 
50% of ‘household waste’ by 2020. ‘Waste from Households’ is the agreed 
UK measure used to report on its compliance with the Directive (2008/98/
EU). The European Commission’s Circular Economy Package includes 
revised proposals on waste to boost global competiveness, sustainable 
economic growth and generate new jobs. The waste policy review (2016) sets a series of targets to:
• Reduce landfill to a maximum of 10% of municipal waste by 2030
• Recycle 75% of packaging waste by 2030
• Recycle 65% of municipal waste by 2030
• Ban landfilling separately collected waste
Recycle 65%   
of municipal waste by 2030Reduce landfill  to maximum of  
10%  of municipal waste by 2030
Ban landfilling separately 
collected wasteRecycle 75%   
of packaging waste by 203012
Sustainable Development and Environmental Efficiency Strategy
3.2 National drivers and legislation
There are a number of national drivers that have informed the 
development of this strategy. These are documented below. As and 
when new initiatives and legislation is introduced, an assessment will be 
undertaken to determine the impact/opportunity that such change(s) could have upon the authority. Any subsequent actions that need to be 
taken will be documented within the action plan which sits alongside  
this strategy. 
Energy efficiency:
•Feed in Tariff (FIT) - A government programme designed to promote theuptake of small-scale renewable and low-carbon electricity generation
technologies.
•Renewable Heat Incentive (RHI) - A government environmental
programme that provides financial incentives to increase the uptake of
renewable heat.
•Energy Company Obligation (ECO) - A government energy efficiency
scheme in Great Britain to help reduce carbon emissions and tackle fuel
poverty. Under the scheme, larger energy suppliers have to deliver energy
efficiency measures to homes in Great Britain.
•The Clean Growth Strategy (2017) includes several government proposalson energy efficiency, including:
- In troducing a voluntary public sector target of a 30% reduction in carbon
emissions by 2020-21
- Providing £255million funding for energy efficiency improvements in- England and help public bodies access sources of funding
- C onsulting on raising minimum standards of energy efficiency for rented
commercial buildings
- Simplif ying requirements for businesses to measure and report on
energy use
Housing and asset management:
•Central Government’s technical housing standards (2015) – this comprisesof additional optional Building Regulation standards on access and
water efficiency after the Code for Sustainable Homes was scrapped.
Decent Homes Standard- A government policy that introduced technicalstandards to ensure that public housing meets a minimum standard of
housing conditions.
•Home Energy Conservation Act 1995 (HECA)-The Act places a requirement
on local authorities to report on action taken to improve the energy
efficiency of residential accommodation.
•Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 – The Act imposes a duty for
those involved in planning to contribute to the achievement of sustainable
development.
•EU Directive on the Energy Performance of Buildings – This directive
resulted in the requirement for energy performance certificates (EPC),
Display Energy Certificates (DEC), air conditioning inspections for new and
existing buildings. In addition to this the Minimum Energy PerformanceStandards (MEPS) will come in to force from 2018. By April 2018 all rented
properties in the non-domestic sector with an F & G rated building will13
Sustainable Development and Environmental Efficiency Strategy
need to be improved to be rented out and from April 2023, all existing 
commercial lettings will also need to be improved.
• The Clean Growth Strategy (2017)- includes several government proposals 
on energy efficiency and housing improvements, including: 
-  £3.6billion to upgrade 1 million homes through ECO and extend support 
for home energy efficiency improvements until 2028 at current level of 
ECO funding.
-  All fuel poor homes to be upgraded to EPC band C by 2030 and to aspire 
to as many homes as possible to be EPC band C by 2035 (where practical, 
cost effective and affordable).-  Consulting on strengthening energy performance standards for new and 
existing homes under Building Regulations, including futureproofing new 
homes for low carbon heating systems
-  Building and extending heat networks, underpinned with public funding 
out to 2021.  
Health and wellbeing:
Local Government and Public Involvement in Health Act 2007 and the 
Health and Social Care Act 2012-Places a duty on primary care trusts and 
local authorities to produce a Joint Strategic Needs Assessment (JSNA) of 
the health and well-being of their local community.  
Water efficiency:
Water Act 2014- Enabled the creation of a new market for retail and 
sewerage services to eligible business customers (including local 
authorities) in England from April 2017. Deregulation of the water market 
should result in customers having a greater opportunity to make water 
savings through accessing more water efficiency services.
 
14
Sustainable Development and Environmental Efficiency Strategy
Transport:
•Transport Act 2000- Introduced a statutory requirement for local transport
authorities to produce a Local Transport Plan (LTP) every five years and
to keep it under review. It sets out the statutory framework for Local
Transport Plans and policies.
•Clean Growth Strategy 2017 -includes several government proposals ontransport, including:
- End the sale of new con ventional petrol and diesel cars and vans by
2040.
- Develop one of the best electric vehicle charging networks in the world.
- Accelerate the uptake of low emission taxis and buses.
- Announcing plans f or public sector to lead the way in transitioning to
zero emissions vehicles.
- In vesting £1.2billion to make cycling and walking natural choice for
shorter journeys.Climate Change Adaptation and Air Quality:
•The Climate Change Act put in place a policy framework to promote
adaptation action in the UK, including:
- UK Climat e Change Risk Assessment- Every five years the UK Government
must carry out an assessment of the current and future risks to the
country from climate change.
- The National A daptation Programme- The Government’s strategy to
address the main risks and opportunities identified in the UK ClimateChange Risk Assessment, which is also produced every five years. The
programme focusses on increasing the awareness of the need to adapt
to a changing climate, increase the resilient against current climateextreme and address gaps in evidence.
•Environment Act 1995- Under Part IV, local authorities have a statutoryduty to review the air quality within their area. The Air Quality Plan for
Nitrogen Dioxide (NO2) in UK 2017 outlined the urgent need to improve
the quality of air in the UK. Funding has and will be allocated to supportlocal authorities to tackle the causes of air pollution and to prepare their
plans and deliver targeted action to improve air quality.
•Flood and Water Management Act 2010- Introduced a Lead Local Flood
Authority Role for local authorities, requiring them to lead the coordination
of local flood risk management in their areas and ‘develop, maintain, apply
and monitor’ a strategy for local flood risk management.15
Sustainable Development and Environmental Efficiency Strategy
Waste and Recycling:
•Waste Management Plan for England- Fulfils the requirement of Article 28
of the Waste Framework Directive (WFD) by providing an analysis of the
current waste management situation in England and evaluating how it will
support implementation of the objectives and provisions of the WFD.
•The Clean Growth Strategy (2017) includes several government proposalson waste, recycling, including:
- W orking towards zero avoidable waste by 2050, maximising value
extracted from our resources and minimising the negative environmentaland carbon impacts associated with extraction, use and disposal.
- P ublishing a new Resources and Waste Strategy to make UK a world
leader in competiveness, resource productivity and efficiency.
Biodiversity:
•Biodiversity 2020- draws on the Natural Environment White Paper andsets out the strategic direction for biodiversity policy and how it is being
implemented into international and EU commitments. The overall aim is to
‘halt overall biodiversity loss, support healthy well-functioning ecosystemsand establish coherent ecological networks, with more and better places
for nature for the benefit of wildlife and people.’
•Clean Growth Strategy 2017 - includes proposals to:
- E stablishing new networks of forests in England, new woodland on
farmland and fund larger woodland and forest creation.
- Plan t 11 million trees and increase the amount of UK timber used in
construction.3.3 Local drivers
The Local Government Act 2000 reformed local government in England 
and Wales and gave the Council powers to promote economic, social and 
environmental well-being within its boundary. The Sustainable Community 
Strategy 2009-2021 is a core document for the Council when exercising its duty under the Act. It sets out a framework for policies and objectives 
around seven key themes. Theme 2: A Greener Borough: Environment and 
Climate Change sets out the goal to achieve: ‘A high quality natural and 
built environment which is valued and enjoyed by all; which encourages 
biodiversity and supports the development of a low carbon community, including local businesses, capable of adapting to the impacts of climate 
change’.
This Sustainable Development and Environmental Efficiency Strategy 
supports work to implement the Sustainable Community Strategy and 
contributes to the following key local plans, strategies and policies:
•Corporate Plan 2017-2021- The Plan outlines the Council’s priorities for
the period and details where it will target limited resources. It focusses on
three priority areas which will help ensure that Bedford Borough continues
to be a place where people want to live, work and spend their leisure time.
•Housing Strategy 2016-2020- As a housing authority, Bedford BoroughCouncil has an obligation to assess the housing conditions in its area and
to formulate strategies to address any issues that are identified. Despite
transferring its housing stock to Bedfordshire Pilgrims Housing Association(BPHA) in 1990, it still retains a role as a strategic and enabling authority
along with a number of statutory responsibilities in relation to housing.
Key objectives include making the best use of existing housing stock by16
Sustainable Development and Environmental Efficiency Strategy
‘increasing energy efficiency, improve adaptability to climate change and 
fuel poverty.’ 
•Local Transport Plan 3 (LTP3)2011-2021- Sets out the long term transportstrategy and contains an implementation plan which is designed to
tackle the Borough’s transport problems. A key objective is ‘to deliver
improvements that encourage a reduction in transport emissions andgreenhouse gases, in order to tackle climate change and develop a low
carbon community capable of adapting to the impacts of climate change’.
•Air Quality Strategy- We are currently developing a new Air Quality
Strategy for Bedford. This strategy will outline the scope and measures to
improve air quality within the Borough.
•Joint Strategic Needs Assessment (JSNA) - A local assessment of current
and future health and social care needs. The data and intelligence withinthe JSNA is used to inform and develop the locally agreed health and
wellbeing priorities within the Health and Wellbeing Strategy.•Health and Wellbeing Strategy 2018-2023- The strategy outlines toppriorities for improving the health and wellbeing of all people living in
Bedford. Priority 3, Empower residents to create strong, safe and healthy
communities; has a primary objective to ‘Work with public and privatesectors partners to ensure homes are affordable, warm, secure and can
support independent living; including new homes built as part of the
19,000 houses proposed by 2035’ with fuel poverty as key performance
indicator to monitor this.
•Bedfordshire Authorities Municipal Waste Management Strategy- 
provides a detailed implementation plan for local municipal wastes and
presents detailed proposals for future waste services, including recycling,
composting and other potential waste treatment technologies; setting outplans and policies for the period up to 2020.
•Corporate Asset Plan 2017-2022- Defines the Council’s objectives andstrategy for managing its assets. The need to monitor and reduce both
energy and water consumption throughout the estate is embedded
throughout the plan.
•Bedford Development Plan- Made up of a series of Local DevelopmentDocuments, the overall strategy for the borough is set out in the first of
these, the Core Strategy and Rural Issues Plan. This sets out the long term
spatial vision for Bedford Borough to 2021. As part of the DevelopmentPlan the Allocations and Designations Local Plan allocates sites to meet
the Borough’s future development needs and designates areas of land
where specific policies will apply. The Sustainable Drainage Systems SPD
defines the requirements for the implementation of SuDS as part of future
local development.17
Sustainable Development and Environmental Efficiency Strategy
•Local Plan 2030 –This will replace many of the policies of the Bedford
Development Plan and will address sustainable development needs to
2030.  The policies that it contains will be used to guide development and
make decisions on planning applications.
•Green Space Strategy (2012-2021)- Bedford Borough Council use thisstrategy to guide how publicly accessible green space is planned,
developed and managed to meet the community’s needs, both now
and in the future, and to identify the associated green space partnershipopportunities and investment priorities.
•Transport Asset Management Plan (TAMP)- The TAMP forms an integralpart of the Local Transport Plan (2011-2021), setting out current practices
and systems being applied to the management of the transport asset.
Whilst many of the working practices relating to good asset managementare already in place, the TAMP will formally incorporate overarching
transportation strategies to maximise the benefits to the community,
leading to better value for money and efficiency savings in service delivery.
Bedford Borough Council’s Street Lighting Policy sits underneath the TAMP.
This policy outlines the basic principles and standards applying to streetlighting and illuminated signage in Bedford Borough as well as the benefits
of well-designed and maintained public lighting e.g. improving safety,
reducing crime, reduced energy costs and consumption.
•Local Flood Risk Management Strategy 2015- A tool to help individuals,communities, businesses and authorities understand and manage flood
risk within the Borough.•Bedford Borough 2020 - A programme of transformation across the
Council that brings together the work that the Council is doing to
address the future challenges presented by reduced funding for local
government, increased demand for its services and the need to continueto improve the experiences of its residents. The programme outlines
the Council’s ambition to redesign how the Council delivers services and
manages operations in 2020 and beyond. A key part of the programme
will be the creation of a Digital Operating Model which will see more of the
Council’s services working together and available digitally.
•Bedford Borough Growth Plan 2018-2022- This plan will help to addresslocally the global economic position and secure faster delivery of jobs
growth, against Bedford’s Economic Development Strategy to deliver the
growth trajectory. The Growth Plan will identify and secure delivery of keyactions in order to target and stimulate private sector growth for business
rates’ maximisation and associated economic benefits, aiming to:- support
growth of start-up and existing businesses, attract new business toBedford Borough, bring forward employment sites faster, promote vitality
of Bedford’s town centre, and support local people into local jobs.4SECTION FOUR
What we have achieved so far19
Sustainable Development and Environmental Efficiency StrategyOffering subsidised  
water butts and 
compost bins  
102 units
We have already delivered a number of different services and  
projects across the Council and wider community which have  
supported environmental efficiency and have increased resilience. 
As a result of the Council’s Carbon Management Plan and Energy 
Performance Contract, the Council successfully reduced its own  
carbon emissions by 53% in 2017/18.
4.1 Reducing CO2 Emissions
Year Total 
carbon* 
(tonnes CO2)Council 
buildings 
only 
(tonnes CO2)Schools 
only 
(tonnes CO2)Transport 
(tonnes CO2)
2009/10 26,957 13,068 10,380 3,415
2017/18 20,126 6,093 8,799 2,347
Saving 6,829 6,975 1,581 1,068
2009/10
2017/18
savingKey
050001000015000200002500030000(tonnes CO2)
Total carbon Council 
buildings only School only Transport
What we have achieved so far...
Upgraded lighting
at 3 mulitstorey car parks 
to LED and motion  
sensors in 2018, so far  
saving £25,000 
348,000kWhProduced and 
circulated a 
Safe, Healthy and Well information leaflet   
for residents advising how to reduce  energy bills whilst keeping  
warm in winter.Reduced emissions by  
1,500 tonnes 
from 2014 -2018, 
saving £170,000 First authority to sign a 
‘water promise’  and
develop a water strategy 
with Anglian Wat er
Since 2010 
the ‘real 
nappies’ 
cashback 
scheme has had 
140 successful 
applicantsSuccessfully delivered financial and 
technical support to residents 
in the Borough via the 
Warm Homes 
Healthy People Fund 
to address
fuel poverty.
Street lighting has  
been improved with over 
14,000 LED lanterns 
and over  2400 columns 
replaced  
so far reducing carbon
* including outsourecd activities20
Sustainable Development and Environmental Efficiency Strategy
4.2 Biomass case study
A biomass boiler was installed in Borough Hall, taking priority in providing 
heat to the building and significantly reducing its carbon footprint. The 
biomass boiler has generated 218mWh of heat so far, which is equal to 
over £11,000 income from the Government’s Renewable Heat Incentive 
(RHI).
This boiler works by creating heat and energy from biomass fuel- in 
this case, wood pellets. These are a sustainable fuel source and 
environmentally friendly as the carbon dioxide released on combustion is 
offset by what the plant absorbed. The Council sources pellets from the UK 
only, minimising the carbon footprint of transport, and uses high quality 
pellets which produce energy more efficiently. 
In addition, Borough Hall’s heating system has been converted to operate 
on natural gas rather than oil, which has seen 200 tonnes less carbon 
dioxide created in just one year. 
21
Sustainable Development and Environmental Efficiency Strategy
4.3 Evaporative Cooling case study
In May 2012, the Council installed four evaporative cooling units to replace 
the traditional air conditioning system used in the data centre in Borough 
Hall. The units use 90% less energy than traditional methods and have 
revealed savings totalling 380,925 kWh and 170 tCO2 from 1st April 2012 - 31st March 2014. In December 2012 the project was recognised by the
Public Sector Sustainability Awards, winning ‘Best IT/E-Commerce Project’.
22
Sustainable Development and Environmental Efficiency Strategy
4.4 Bedford International Athletics Stadium case study
Solar Panels at Bedford International Athletics stadium
Solar photovoltaic panels (solar PV) were installed on the SSW facing 
pitched roof at the stadium in 2014 as part of the many number of projects 
delivered through the RE:FIT programme. This has helped to reduce the 
sites electricity consumption and to generate an income through the Feed-
in Tariff (FIT) scheme. The 49.82kW system comprises of 212 panels, rated 
at 235W each, split across two roofs. It is estimated that the system will 
generate around 40,000kWh/annum, saving around 20,000kWh/annum 
(£1,974/annum).
The income from the Feed-in-Tariff is estimated to be approximately 
£5,100 plus £800 export per annum resulting in a total financial saving 
of approximately £8,000/annum. The project will reduce the stadium’s 
carbon emissions by 10,354kgCO2/annum.
23
Sustainable Development and Environmental Efficiency Strategy
4.5 Hydro Power case study
Hydro Power project on the River Ouse
A micro hydro power facility, installed on the River Ouse, was officially 
opened in June 2012. Two Archimedes screws at the Boat Slide Weir 
generate approximately 130,000 kWh of electricity per year and save 
approximately 70 tonnes of CO2 a year.  Re-establishing the tradition of 
using power from the river, the project has also proven to be an excellent 
educational resource.
24
Sustainable Development and Environmental Efficiency Strategy
4.6 Mayor’s Climate Change Fund case study
The Mayor’s Climate Change Fund was launched in January 2010 and 
provided 50% match-funding to support community group projects 
which contributed to a reduction of carbon emissions within the Borough. 
Voluntary & community groups, not for profit organisations, the public 
sector including schools, parish councils and charities applied for a 
minimum grant level of £5,000 and a maximum of £20,000 to 50% 
match-fund measures to reduce energy consumption such as insulation, 
heating improvements and lighting upgrades. The fund was launched in 
early 2010 with £350,000 allocated to projects from 2010 - 2015.
Biddenham Upper School lighting 
project replacing t12 with T5 lights.
Solar PV panes installed on  
Scott Lower school’s roof.
Air source heat pump at Bedford 
Rural Communities CharityInstallation of new energy efficient 
boiler at Community Voluntary 
Service Bromham Road25
Sustainable Development and Environmental Efficiency Strategy
4.7 Other projects include
• Worked in partnership with Central Bedfordshire Council and Luton 
Borough Council to deliver an Energy Auditing Train the Trainer Course 
utilising funding secured through the Climate Change Skills Fund.
• Successfully delivered financial and technical support to residents in the 
Borough via the Warm Homes Healthy People Fund to address fuel poverty.
• Produced and circulated a Safe, Healthy and Well information leaflet for 
residents advising them how to reduce their energy bills whilst keeping 
warm in winter.
• The ‘Real Nappies’ cashback’ scheme has had 140 successful applicants. 
• Street lighting has been improved across the Borough with over 14,000 
LED lanterns installed and over 2,400 columns replaced, with works 
continuing up to March 2019. This has so far reduced the carbon emissions 
by around 1,500 tonnes from 2014 to 2018, reducing energy consumption 
by over 1.7million kWh and saving the Council around £170,000.
• Participation in the Carbon Trust’s Collaborative Low Carbon Schools  
Service (CLCSS)
• First authority to sign a ‘Water Promise’ and develop a Water Strategy  
with Anglian Water
• Offering subsidised water butts  and compost bins
• ‘Watt a difference’ and ‘Energy Champions’ campaigns to promote 
behavioural change across the authoritySECTION FIVE
Our strategic priorities527
Sustainable Development and Environmental Efficiency Strategy
5. Our strategic priorities 
Priority 1: Demonstrating community leadership
We believe in taking responsibility for the well-being and improvement of 
our communities by demonstrating integrity and long-term commitment 
to developing and applying our environmental strategy. Our priority is to 
engage and represent the community, working towards a shared vision for 
the area, in partnership with residents and businesses. We believe that, as 
a Council, we have a uniquely demographic position, and as such can bring 
key values to the area in a community leadership role.
In order to achieve this, as detailed within our action plan, we will:
• Reduce energy and carbon emissions across the Councils estate
• Support local communities to reduce energy costs and carbon emissions
• Reduce water usage and assess opportunities for water saving
• Reduce emissions from Council owned transport
• Support schools/academies in the Borough to reduce their energy and 
water use and use sustainable transport
• Support our staff to increase awareness and promote sustainable travel
• Improving efficiencies in waste disposal, increasing recycling performance 
& reducing waste to landfill
• Assist our partners and stakeholders in monitoring and reducing energy 
and water consumption
• Promote green infrastructure and biodiversity across the Council estate
• Encourage green practices and procurement within the CouncilPriority 2: Building community resilience
Building community resilience is crucial in ensuring any activities 
we undertake have a sustained effect. We believe in working with 
communities to enable them to feel empowered to take ownership of 
their resilience. This is of vital importance to ensure that businesses and 
communities can self-assess risks to their way of life and continuity of 
business, and take the appropriate steps to mitigate, prepare, respond 
and recover from incidents and emergencies in relation to climate change. 
In building community resistance, organisations protect themselves by 
ensuring sustained engagement through a variety of resources, social 
connections, and continual development and acquisition of new skills. 
Our aim is to assist in identifying and establishing resources in order to 
increase awareness and knowledge and, as such, impacts of incidents will 
be reduced.
In order to achieve this, as detailed within our action plan, we will:
• Support local communities to help them become resilient to the impacts 
of climate change
• Support local businesses to help them become resilient to climate change
• Support local communities with sustainable transport choices
• Support the installation of low carbon buildings and communities within 
new and existing developments
• Support the reduction in emissions from transport and encourage 
sustainable transport in new developments
• Ensure open spaces including parks and recreation are resilient to 
predicted climate changesSECTION SIX
Implementation and Monitoring Progress629
Sustainable Development and Environmental Efficiency Strategy
6. Implementation and Monitoring Progress
The Council is entering into a period of financial challenges and the  
need for efficiency and income generation is at its most prevalent.  
The Council needs to develop new ways of thinking to continue to  
provide services to Bedford residents to the highest standard whilst 
making sustainable choices.
To ensure that the key priorities are delivered, an action plan has been 
developed which outlines the actions to be carried out under each  
priority. This can be found on the Council’s website. This action plan  will be reviewed and updated annually. A progress report will also be 
published annually.
The Sustainable Development and Environmental Efficiency Strategy  
will be communicated across the authority and with partners, as well 
as to residents in the Borough. This will be done via:
•The Councils website
•Internal staff newsletters
•Involvement with internal and external partners to align theirachievements and strategies
ENV081_18 design@bedford.gov.uk  www .bedford.gov.ukClaire Wilkinson 
Environmental Services  Bedford Borough Council Borough Hall Cauldwell Street Bedford, MK42 9AP
claire.wilkinson@bedfor d.gov.uk 
www.bedford.gov.ukIf you would like further copies, a large-print copy or information about us 
and our services, please contact us at our address below.
Finding out more