1 
 CARBON NEUTRAL 
ACTION PLAN  
Contents  
CARBON NEUTRAL ACTION PLAN  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............  1 
1. Foreword  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .........  2 
2. Introduction  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 3 
3. Background and evidence  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............  3 
PART 1  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .....................  5 
4. Our Ca rbon Footprint  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................  5 
4.1 Blaby District’s Carbon Footprint  ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 5 
4.2 Blaby District Council’s Carbon Footprint  ................................ ................................ .....................  8 
5. Blaby’s Carbon Budget  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................  12 
6. Carbon Reduction Measures  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........  15 
6.1 Transport  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 15 
6.2 Built Environment  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................  17 
6.3 Energy  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........  18 
6.4 Waste and Water  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................  20 
6.5 Resources and Consumption  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......  21 
7. Air Quality  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........  22 
8. Biodiversity  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  23 
9. Governance, Funding and Engagement  ................................ ................................ ............................  23 
10. Carbon Offsetting  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................  25 
11. Resilience and Adaptation  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............  26 
12. Monitoring and evaluation  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............  26 
 
 
 
 2 
 1. Foreword  
Today we face a global climate emergency which requires us to think beyond 
‘business as usual ’. But while central g overnment  must play a vital role we recognise 
that many of the solutions will happen at the local level. As a District we need to act 
now to reduce direct and indirect carbon emissions to net zero. We need to prepare 
and adapt to deal with the inevitable i mpacts of climate change. We recognise that 
achieving our vision will not be easy. There are entrenched market and wider forces 
that will support existing fossil -fuel dependent, consumption -based systems. We will 
need to show strong leadership to create op portunities for all to participate in the 
benefits of change with its costs shared fairly.  
 
Climate change increases the likelihood of extreme weather events, including floods, 
droughts and heatwaves and the health impacts are likely to be significant. In recent 
years there have been increasing public calls for action on climate change and the 
environment, be that in terms of reducing the use of single use plastics, improving air 
quality, encouraging the use of low emissions vehicles and improving energy 
efficiency.  
 
Now more than ever we must look forward rather than aiming to get back to normal 
and be ready to take the opportunities emerging from a ‘green recovery’. The 
collective response to Covid 19 has demonstrated our ability to take significant and 
far reaching steps  to tackle a global threat. It has  shown us how we can innovate and 
deliver our services differently. We will use what we  have learnt from the pandemic to 
inform our climate strategy and action plan going forward. The lockdown has brought 
about significant benefits to air quality and the environment and has demonstrated 
how behaviours can be dramatically changed through effective communication and 
leadership. We will take advantage of these and use this window of opportunity to 
shape our res ponse to the global climate emergency.  
 
We have an exciting opportunity to address the challenge of climate change w hilst 
also bringing about numerous co -benefits; r educing inequality , delivering sustainable 
new homes, creating a district with more green s paces and  places fo r our children to 
play, cleaner air and  jobs and opportunities for all. This is a complex problem. We 
know that no single organisation alone can deliver the scale and pace of change we 
need . So w e will engage widely to understand how we can work together to achieve 
the am bitions set out in our Clim ate Change Strategy . This action plan gives Blaby 
District Council a focus and direction and provides the fr amework from  which we can  
take responsibility and work together to transform the distr ict. 
 
 
Cllr Terry Richardson Leader Blaby District Council  
Cllr Sharon Coe Portfolio Holder for Health Wellbeing and Regulatory Services  3 
 2. Introduction  
This is the Council’s Carbon  Neutral  Action Plan ( CNAP) setting out how we intend to 
cut our Carbon Emiss ions and become car bon neutral. It was adopted in August 
2020  and is intended to be reviewed and updated every year.  
 
In line with the UK Government’s commitments under the Climate Change Act1, this 
Action Plan is the first major step we are taking to deli ver our commitment to 
achieving net -zero carbon emissions across the Council’s operations by 2030 and 
carbon neutrali ty across the district by 2050  if not sooner . This plan identifies where 
our current emissions come from and identifies  many  potential carb on reduction 
measures to increase our chance of staying within our carbon budget and meeting 
these targets.  We are committed to working with the whole district to reduce 
emissions and there is an appreciation that far more resource and investment will be 
required to implement many of the actions and reach our targets.  
 
The plan is not a fixed or definitive path to carbon neutrality as there are likely to be 
unpredictable local and national developments in the future that wi ll influence our 
actions . To ensur e the action plan adapts to such changes and remains valid over 
time, it will be reviewed on an a nnual basis. This  will allow  us to take into account the 
latest research and funding opportunities , incorporate the new technologies  and 
respond to new regulat ions as they arise. This flexible approach will allow us to learn 
from previous actions and enable new partners and stakeholders to contribute. It will 
be vital to maintain involvement from citizens, businesses and organisations across 
the district to help  in the development and implementation of actions.  
 
Blaby District  Council is committed to taking  action to reverse the trend of increasing 
consumption of natural resourc es. If everyone on Earth lived as the average British 
or European citizen does, we wou ld need nearly three planets’ worth of resources to 
sustain us2. This means, on average, each of us is using too much of the world’s 
resources to produce the food we eat, treat the waste we produce, and generate the 
energy we use.  This action plan sets out  ways we can shape our environment and  
minimise our resou rce use to help keep  our district  prosperous, healthy and happy.  
3. Background and evidence  
It has become clear that there is now an urgency to address  climate c hange and  the 
science has become unequivo cal. There is recognition that the impacts of climate 
breakdown are already causing serious damage around the world. The 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Special Report on Global 
Warming of 1.5° Celsius  describes the enormous harm that a 2°C elsius  (C) average 
rise in global temperatures is likely to cause co mpared with a 1.5°C rise (IPCC, 
2018). And we can see the  evide nce of rising temperatures ourselves. In Ju ly 2019  
an all -time high temperature of 38.1oC was recorded in the UK . The latest UK climate 
projections (UKCP18)3 suggest that the UK climate will continue to warm over the 
rest of this century,  and on average, will result in hotter and drier summers, warmer 
and wetter winters with more extreme weather eve nts expected, though individua l 
years may not conform to this patt ern4. 4 
 A Global Climate Emergency  
In May 2019 the UK became the first parliament to declare a climate emergency. 
While there is no single definition of what that means Blaby Dist rict Council 
recognises this fact and has p ledged to become carbon neutral across its services by 
2030 and to use the powers and influence it has to support partners, business and 
the community  to become carbon neutral a cross the district by 2050  if not sooner . In 
light of this the Council has comm itted to a wide range of comprehensive actions to 
reduce  our carb on emissions, with the headline being to hit the net zero target by 
2030 for the Council’s activities.  In simple terms, this document:  
 
 Establishes a framework for reducing carbon emissions  
 Sets out what our current ‘baseline’ carbon emissions are (or ‘carbon 
footp rint’), so we know where we are starting from and can set meaningful 
targets and milestones.  
 Establishes our carbon budget and identifies potential carbon reduction 
pathways.  
 Priorit ises carbon reduction measures and suggests timescales in which  we 
inten d to deliver these.  
 Puts forward potential future projects, or ideas requiring further investigation 
before being committed to.  
 A series of options for how different projects may be fu nded.  
 The process by which this will be managed.  
Carbon Neutral  
 
In the last 50 years the average global temperature has increased at the fastest  rate 
in recorded history and it  continues to accelerate. When sunlight reaches the earth 
energy is absorbed on  the surface and is radiated out into the atmosphere as heat. 
Gases in our atmosphere trap this heat in a natural process that stops our planet 
becoming cold and unin habitable. This is the ‘Green house effect’. Simply put, human 
activities are carbon positi ve. T he burning of fossil fuels for electricity , heat and 
transport has increased the amount of Carbon Dioxide and other greenhouse gas es 
therefore trapping more  heat and increasing  global temperature s.  
 
Carbon neutrality, or having a net zero carbon foot print means having no net release 
of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere. We can achieve net zero  emissions by 
balancing carbon emissions with carbon removal (often through carbon offsetting) or 
simply eliminating carbon emissions altogeth er from those  activities that release it 
such as transportation, energy production, agriculture, and industrial processes.  
Renewable energy sources such as wind, water and solar are said to  be carbon 
neutral whereas f ossil fuels are  carbon positive . 
 
 
 5 
 There are other green house gases including methane, n itrous oxide and  fluorinated  
gases which  also trap heat and contribute to climate change. When we talk about 
carbon emissions and carbon neutrality we also refer to these gases and their impact 
is accounted for in carbon dio xide equivalents (CO 2e), the standard unit for 
measuring carbon footprints.  
PART 1  
4. Our Carbon Footprint  
Before we decide what we should do differently, to reduce our emissions, we need to 
properly understand what  our current activities are emitting. This i s sometimes 
known as working out our ‘carbon footprint’ which, in  technical terms, is a measure  of 
the greenhouse gases (GHGs)5 emitted into the atmosphere from sources in a  
specified area or organisation. It usually includes all relevant greenhouse gases,  the 
most common of which is  carbon dioxide (CO 2). Together with e missions of other 
GHGs such as me thane (CH 4) or nitrous oxide (N 2O) this is measured as  ‘carbon 
dioxide equivalent’ (CO 2e)6. 
 
Nationwide, emissions of CO 2 make up 81% of GHG emissions, with the remainder 
from methane (11%), nitrous  oxide (4%) and fluorinated gases (3%), when weighted 
by Global Warming Potential (GWP)7. The biggest source of  greenhouse gas 
emissions in the UK is transport, closely followed by energy supply.  To help set the 
wider context, this Action Plan examines both the carbon footprint of the 
geographical area of  Blaby District as a whole, and that of Blaby District  Council as 
an organisation.  
4.1 Blaby District’s  Carbon Footprint  
The carbon footprint for the geographical ar ea of Blaby should comprise all GHG 
emissions that occur in the  area – this includes commercial and industrial sources, 
domestic homes , transport, agriculture, waste and land use. There is no perfect, 
simple and 100% accurate way of calculating a carbon fo otprint, as it relies on a 
number of assumptions.  The Government Department for Business, Energy and 
Industrial Strategy (BEIS) annually publishes de tailed local authority level CO 2 
emissions data, however does not provide data on the other recognised Kyot o 
Protocol GHGs emissions, collectively known as CO2e emissions. As such, this data 
‘misses’ 19% of all GHGs but is useful for showing the overall trend.  
BEIS data is publi shed with a 2 year lag , and therefore the data for 2017 is the most 
recent available . From this it is evident that the trend in Blaby is similar  to the 
national trend;  CO 2 emissions slowly and steadil y declining over the last few years, 
due mainly to the decarbonisation  of the electricity gri d (see figure 2 ). Emissions from 
agriculture  waste and peatlands are not included in these figures because they 
primarily produce methane rather  than CO 2, therefore are missed fro m the BEIS 
emissions data .  
 6 
 Blaby will us e the SCATTER tool to demonstrate the potential carbon reductions that 
are possibl e through certain pathways. SCATTER is a local authority focussed 
emissions tool, built to help create low -carbon local authorities and has been used to 
gene rate our area footprint. It’s  development  has been funded by the Department for 
Business Energy and  Industrial Strategy (BEIS) in collaboration with Nottingham City 
Council, GMCA, the Anthesis Group and the Tyndall Centre.   
Footprint Scope  Activities taking place within a city can generate GHG emissions that 
occur inside the city boundary as well as out side the city boundary. To distinguish 
among them, emissions are commonly grouped into three categories based on 
where they occur:  
•Scope 1 (Direct emissions) GHG emissions from sources located within the district 
boundary  
•Scope 2 (Indirect emissions) GHG  emissions occurring as a consequence of the 
use of grid -supplied electricity, heat, steam and/or cooling within the district boundary 
but purchased from outside the boundary.  
•Scope 3 All other indirect emissions from activities and their lifecycles that occur 
outside the district boun dary as a result of activities taking place within the district 
such as procurement, waste disposal and investments . 
Blaby District’s Green House G as Emissions by Source  (2017)  
 
Table 1. Key emissions from main sources.  
TonnesCO 2e Scope 1  Scope 2  Scope 3    
Stationary Energy9 156,418  125,621  45,703    
Transport9 320,961   179,709    
Aviation9   51,901    
Waste9 17,857      
Imported consumption10   526,302    
Total 495,236  125,621  803,615 Net Total  Per Capita11 
    1,424,472  14.2 7 
 Figure 1. Blaby District’s green house gas emissions by source (2017).  
 
Detailed information about the key emissions from the main sources are shown in the 
table ab ove (table 1 ) and pie chart (fig ure 1 ). The se emissions include imported 
consumption emissions, which is the carbon locked into the goods, food and services 
we consume from around this country and the world. These are very hard to 
measure locally, but we can make an estimate fo r Blaby District from  BEIS data . It 
shows that these often hidden emissions make up around a third of our emissions 
footprint overall, followed by transport and residential building emissions.  
Carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gas emissions come from a variety of sources. 
Some are naturally occurring processes  and others from activities in our homes, 
transport and businesses. Carbon emissions, especially those that we can measure, 
generally come from the use of energy for heating, vehicles, motors, machinery and 
appliances. S ome of these, like traditional cars or gas boilers, have direct emissions 
from the burning of fossil fuels. Others have them through the use of electricity from 
the grid.  
Government data shows what kind of energy is consumed in Blaby District - 
principally  gas (28.6%), petrol products (53%) and electricity (15.8%)12. Each energy 
source will have a different carbon intensity and footprint, meaning the emissions 
from some sources, such as coal, are worse than others. The true picture of carbon 
and greenhouse gas emissions in any district or city is wider than the description 
above. There are emissions involved in the lifecycle of products, and the 
infrastructure that delivers energy and products to us.  
8 
 4.2 Blaby District Council’s Carbon Footprint  
The carbon footprint of Blaby District Council (as an organisation) comprises 
emissions that occur as a result of the Council ’s own operations.  We have calculated 
the carbon footprint of the Council ’s own operations in line with the UK Government’s  
Environmental Repo rting Guidelines13. The footprint is calculated using data for the 
financial year 1 April 2018 to 31 March 2019.  
 
The resultant baseline for 2018/19 is summarised as follows:  
Table 2: Summary of GHG emissions (tonnes CO2e)  
Total Gross Emissions 2018/19  Tonnes CO 2e 
Scope 1 (Direct)  683.91  
Scope 2 (Indirect)  96.2 
Scope 3 (other indirect)  220.22  
Grand Total  1000.33  
The O rganisational boundary  
In order to produce this Carbon Management Action Plan it is essential to accurately 
establish the scope of the o perations on which our organisation will report. This 
process is known defining the organisational boundary. This means establishing 
what activities and functions are counted (or ‘in scope’) for the purpose of 
determining the Council’s overall emissions, a nd by default what activities and 
functions are not counted (‘out of scope’). This stage of the process involves 
reviewing the Council’s operations to determine activities that give rise to carbon 
emissions. As district council the organisational structure  is relatively straightforward 
and reporting therefore  include s the impacts from everything that is owned and 
operated by the organisation.  
Defining the scope  
The starting point for carbon management is to accurately establish the emissions 
baseline. The scope of the baseline includes the required types and sources of 
emissions over a defined timescale. The baseline is a fixed point against which a 
reduction target can be set and future performance monitored. Emission  releasing 
activities are classified in to three groups known as scopes. These  scopes and their  
relevant associated activities are  defined in the GHG Protocol Corporate Standard , 
as follows:  
Table 3: GHG Emission scopes and associated emission releasing activities 
(BEIS,2019a)  
Scope  Definition / Activity  
1 (Direct)  Emissions from sources that are owned or controlled by the 
organisation  
Fuels  Fuel sources combusted at a site or in an asset owned or 
controlled by the organisation.  
Passenger 
Vehicles  Travel in cars and on motorcycles owned or c ontrolled by the 
organisation.  
Delivery 
Vehicles  Travel in vans and heavy goods vehicles that are owned or 
controlled by the organisation.  9 
 2 (Indirect)  Emissions that are a consequence of the organisation’s 
operations, but occur from sources owned or co ntrolled by 
another company  
Electricity 
(grid)  Electricity used by an organisation at sites owned or controlled by 
them.  
3 (Other 
Indirect)  Emissions that are a consequence of the organisation’s 
operations, which occur at sources which they do not own or  
control  
Well-to-Tank 
(WTT):  
Fuels  Upstream emissions associated with extraction, refining and 
transportation of the raw fuel sources  to an organisation’s site (or 
asset) prior to their combustion.  
Transmission 
and  
distribution (T  
and D) Emissions asso ciated with grid losses (the energy loss that 
occurs in getting the electricity from the power plant to the 
organisations that purchase it).  
Well-to-Tank 
(WTT):  
Electricity  Upstream emissions of extraction, refining and transportation of 
primary fuels bef ore their use in the generation of electricity.  
Land business 
travel  Travel for business purposes in assets not owned or directly 
operated by the organisation.  
Well-to-Tank 
(WTT):  
Passenger 
vehicles  Upstream emissions associated with extraction, refining  and 
transportation of the raw fuels before they are used to power the 
transport mode.  
Well-to-Tank 
(WTT):  
Delivery 
vehicles  Upstream emissions associated with extraction, refining and 
transportation of the raw fuels before they are used to power the 
transport mode.  
Well-to-Tank 
(WTT):Land 
business 
travel  Upstream emissions associated with extraction, refining and 
transportation of the raw fuels before they are used to power the 
transport mode.  
 
Scope 1 – All Direct Emissions from the activities of an or ganisation or under their 
control. This includes fuel combustion on site, from owned vehicles and fugitive 
emissions.  
Scope 2 – Indirect Emissions from electricity purchased and used by the 
organisation. Emissions will be created during the production of the energy and 
eventually used by the organisation and includes electricity from energy supplier to 
power computers, heating and cooling.  
Scope 3 – All Other Indirect Emissions from activities of the organisation. This is 
usually the largest share of the c arbon footprint  (up to 90%) , especially for office -
based companies, covering emissions associated with business travel, commuting, 
procurement, waste  disposal,  water, downstream leased assets (leisure centres and 
industrial estates)  and upstream emissions associated with purchased good or 
services  
Outside of scopes (Table 5 ) – This relates to biogenic emissions that are considered 
to have a net zero carbon dioxide impact due to the carbon they absorb during their 10 
 growth. When they are burned to produce ener gy this carbon is released and the 
associated emissions are recorded as being ‘outside of scopes’ in accordance with 
the GHG Protocol. For example the average biofuel blend of forecourt diesel.  
Table 4:  Breakdown of emissions (tonnes CO2e)  
GHG emissions (T onnes of 
CO 2e) Scope 1  Scope 2  Scope 3  Grand 
Total  
Building and Utilities      
Electricity for council buildings  - 96.2 - 96.2 
Gas consumption  80.85  - - 80.85  
Water Supply and treatment  - - 0.986  0.986  
Well to tank emissions for fuel 
(heat)  - - 11.24  11.24  
Electricity transmission and 
Distribution  - - 8.20 8.20 
Transport      
Fleet  603.06  - - 603.06  
Business miles  - - 46.09  46.09  
Well to tank emissions for fuel 
(fleet)  - - 141.98  141.98  
Well to tank emissions for fuel 
(business miles)  - - 11.72  11.72 
Grand Total  683.91  96.2 220.22  1000.33  
 
Table 5: Emissions that fall outside of scope (tonnes CO 2e) 
Outside of scope   (Tonnes of CO 2e)  
Diesel (Average biofuel blend)  13.1  
Excluded Emissions  
In addition to those sources detailed above there are o ther areas which give rise to 
emissions that the Council feel should either be included but for which, at this time, 
insufficient detail is hel d to enable them to be included or  excluded for specific 
reason.  These are as follows:  
Scope  1 
Refrigerants  – Leakage from air -conditioning and refrigeration units can release 
gases into the atmosphere that have a global warming potential. At present this data 
is not available, however going forward the Council will look to find methods to record 
and report this inf ormation.  
Scope 3 
Waste Disposal  – This plan deliberately excludes emissions arising from waste 
treatment /disposal as these are considered to be  district wide in origin and will be 
considered as part of those actions which seek to influence resource use an d waste 
minimisation across area wide.  
 
Waste production  – The Council produces waste as part of the day to day  operation 
of its services i.e. general office waste and through the delivery of some of its 
services such  as highway maintenance. At the time of  writing this plan it was not 
possible to include emissions arising from  these sources but this will be calculated 
and included moving forward.  
 11 
 Purchased Goods and Services  – By far the biggest ‘exclusion’ relates to the 
purch asing and use of goods, and t he consequential ‘embodied energy’ of such 
goods. Embodied energy is a co mplex area, but in simple means the energy used to 
make and distribute goods, before such goods are actually used.  
Employee commuting  – Whilst the emissions relating to employees tra velling for the 
purposes of work, to and from meetings for example, is included within this report, 
the e missions arising from employees travelling from home to work are not included. 
This approach is accepted as part of the GHG guidance and we will look t o find 
methods to record and report  this information going forward.  
 
Leisure Centres – Blaby District Council leases th e Huncote and Enderby Leisure 
Centre s to Everyone Active. Both  the financial and day to day management  of these 
is controlle d wholly by E veryone Active and as such we do not intend to report these  
at present . However there may be scope to influence emissions arising from these 
facilities from contractual perspective going forward.  
Data Collection  
The energy data used to calculate the baseli ne was gathered from different sources 
including: Annual energy sta tements from util ity providers and fleet fuel us age 
mileage and employee expenses claims held by neighbourhood services and finance 
teams. Work continues to ensure that this data is robust and systems  are in place to 
ensure ongoing timely and accurate collection of such data.  
Table 6: Sources of data by energy type  
Energy type  Source  Data Quality  
Gas Energy invoices and Annual  
Energy Statements from  supplier  Data held and collated by 
Finance. 
Passenger 
vehicles  The Merridale system at the 
Depot.  Usage reports sent monthly to 
finance a nd collated  
Electricity  Energy invoices and Annual  
Energy Statements from  supplier  Data held and collated by 
Finance  
Business 
travel  Employee mileage claim s made 
on iTrent.  Data held on iTrent and 
extracted by Finance.  
Water  Statements from supplier  Data held and collated by 
Finance.  
 
Calculating the Baseline  
To calculate what your CO2e emissions are, it is necessary to convert the ‘raw’ data 
(such as KWh  of electricity used) into CO2e emissions. This process is relatively 
straightforward, using what are known as ‘conversion factors’. The carbon 
conversion factors used for this Action Plan are the 2018 UK Government published 
carbon conversi on factors (BEI S, 2019b). The Council will use the most up to date 
conversion factors each time it updates this plan or produces an annual report.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 12 
  
 
 
The key conversion factors used are as follows:  
Table 7: Key GHG conversion factors (BEIS, 2019b)  
Energy Type  Conve rsion factor  
Fuels   
Natural Gas  0.18396 kg CO2e / kWh (Gross CV)  
Electricity   
Electricity generated  0.28307 kg CO2e / kWh (Gross CV)  
Passenger vehicles   
Diesel (average biofuel blend)  2.62694 kg CO 2e / litre  
Business Travel   
Average car (unknown f uel) 0.29072 kg CO 2e / litre  
Water Consumption and Treatment   
Water supply  0.344  kg CO 2e / m3 
Water treatment  0.708 kg CO 2e / m3 
 
5. Blaby’s Carbon Budget  
The relationship between CO 2 and global temperatures means that staying within a 
given temperature thresh old requires that only  a certain total quantity of CO 2 is 
released to the atmosphere. This is the global carbon budget. It provides an 
indication of the maximum cumulative amount of carbon dioxide that can be emitted 
to the atmosphere through human actions , between 2020 and 2100, to be in line with 
keeping globa l temperature rise well below 2oCelsius and pursuing efforts to limit to 
1.5oCelsius  rise by the end of the century14. A carbon budget of this type is not a 
financial scheme or a limit or cap given t o individual persons or organisations.   
 
With this in mind it follows that any  target  date for carbon neutrality is meaningless 
unless we also ab ide by an overall carbon budget . The carbon budget shapes the 
rate at which we need to decrease emissions each year. Analysis of the national 
picture has suggested that if nationally we were to plot a straight line pathway to zero 
from today, the target date would have to be 2025 to avoid exceeding the available 
carbon budget.  This stresses the need to cut emission  deeper and sooner to give us 
the best possible chance of avoiding dangerous levels of climate change.  
 
Based on  analysis  by the Tyndall Centre for Climate Change Research , for Blaby  
District  to make its ‘fair’ contribution towards the Paris Climate Change  Agreement, 
the following recommendations should be adopted:  
1. Stay within a maximum cumulative carbon dioxide emissions budget of 3.8 
million tonnes (MtCO 2) for the period of 2020 to 2100. At 2017 CO 2 emission 
levels  based  on BEIS LA statistics 2017 CO 2 emissions (excluding aviation, 
shipping, process CO 2 emissions from cement pr oduction and those from  land 
use, land use change and forestry) , Blaby would use this entire budget within 
6 years from 2020.  13 
 2. Initiate an immediate program me of CO 2 mitigation to del iver cuts in em issions 
averaging a minimum of 14.2% per year to deliver a Paris aligned carbon 
budget. These annual reductions in emissions require national and local 
action, and could be part of a wider collaboration with other local authorities.  
3. Reach z ero or near zero carbon no later than 2040. This report provides an 
indicative CO 2 reduction pathway that stays within the recommended 
maximum carbon budget of 3.8 MtCO 2. At 2040 5% of the budget remains. 
This represents very low levels of residual CO 2 emissions by this time, or the 
Authority  Should  opt to forgo these residual emissions and cut emissions to 
zero at this point.  
 
Figure 2 below shows a visual representation of Blaby District’s historic cumulative 
emission period (grey), allocated carbon budg et (green) and overshoot of emissions 
(red) from 2005 – 2050. This clearly demonstrates that knowing and limiting our 
cumulative emissions is as, if not more importance than any particular target date.  
 
Figure 2. Illustrative potential cumulative emission scenarios to 2050 for 
Blaby District  
 
Carbon Reduction Pathways  
Blaby’s carbon budget illustrates the need to pursue an ambitious  carbon reduction  
programme  if we are to become  a carbon neutral district by  2050 a nd preferably 
earlier. Figure 3 below shows  some illustrative pathways that we could take  in line 
with our carbon budget in comparison  to the trend in emissions if Blaby  District 
Council  were to continue as it has done so since 2005.  
14 
 Figure 3.  Illustrative emission reduction pathways to 2050 for B laby District  
 
A delayed reaction to emissions reduction  (yellow line)  would mean emissions 
continue along the business as usual path, slowly increasing  in scale of emission 
cuts year on year and  becoming more rapid as we get closer to 2030. This would 
allow time for a more gradual implementation of emission reduction actions but puts 
huge pressure on later years and has  a greater risk of overshooting Blaby’s carbon 
budget . Delaying action by just one year means the minimum 14.2% annual 
reduction to remain  below Blaby’s carbon budget , becomes 15.2%. This clearly 
demonstrates the urgent need to start reducing Blaby’s emissions immediately. T he 
longer we delay the greater the effort needed  in the subsequent years . 
Instead, Blaby  will aim to reduce emissions a s quickly as possible to increase the 
chance of staying within our ca rbon budget and meeting our  carbon neutral 
ambition s. To do this, emission reduction rates wo uld have to be at or above 14.2 % 
per year. This is the rate of emissions reduction required ea ch year to reduce 
emissions to the point when cumulative emissions up to 21 00 remain below 5% of 
Blaby ’s total carbon budget, and acknowledges the technical challenges  behind 
removing all emissions.  Negative emissions technologies and offsetting could be 
used to neutralise remaining emissions.   
Using tools, such as SCATTER15 the depth and breadth of carbon reduction 
interventions required to get to carbon neutral will be identified. This will provide  us 
with an idea  of the scale of action needed to become c arbon neutral and how much 
carbon can be saved by certain types of interventions if they were to be rolled out 
across the district.  
 
15 
 Ultimately, for the District  to meet its  carbon neutral aspiration s, we must increase 
our use of renewable energy , display better energy behaviours, use more efficient 
products and buildings, alongside an overall red uction in the demand for energy and 
consumption.  
6. Carbon Reduction Measures  
The technologies and approaches to deliver a net -zero world are believed to be 
available  already, and with strong leadership could be implemented at a cost 
effective level (1-2% UK GDP)16. The co-benefits of tackling  climate change  and 
Green Recovery include  improving  the health and diets of our citizens, better  air 
quality and new  opport unities through a growing green economy . 
This plan places a high priority on carbon reduction measures to order improve our 
chance of staying with in our carbon budget and meet our  carbon neutral ambitions. 
There are 5 main target areas for actions on carbon re duction:  
 Transport  
 The Built Environment                                         
 Energy   
 Waste and water  
 Resource Use  
 Air quality  
 
Within each ta rget area of the plan,  key objectives and actions  and timescales for 
implementation are identified.  
Short ter m (2020 -2023 ) Actions already underway or that can start now and aim to 
complete within the first 3 years (unless earlier date is specified).  
Medium term  (2023 -2026 ) – Actions requiring further development before 
implementing. Aim to complete 3 – 6 years.  
Long term  (2026 -2030) - Actions that require significant ly more development or 
resource before implementation. Aim to complete by 2030.  
To facilitate understanding and implementation we have grouped the activities 
needed to become carbon neutral into 5 mai n sections. Each section will introduce 
the key issues and current activities, and a range of actions that will deliver the  
overall  objective. It will also specify whether the action contributes to the carbon 
neutral target for Council Operations or that o f the Wider District.  
 
6.1 Transport  
Transport makes up a significant proportion of both the council ’s own carbon footprint 
(approximately 60%) and that of the wider  district (around 3 5%) with most of this 
coming fr om car s, vans, lorries and buses. Action is needed to reduce j ourne ys of 
these type of vehicl es and  therefore we will pursue policies that encourage the use of 
public transport together with walking and cycling  and increase  the use of electric  
vehicles  (EV’s) . This will have the co -benefit of improving air quality, mobility and the  
health and wellbeing or our citizens .  16 
  
Electric vehicle emissions are primarily determined by the upstream emissions: that 
is, from the production and distribution of the energy used to charge them. Recent 
research als o suggests that the  lifetime carbon emissions of EV’s are approximately 
half those of a conventional vehicle, with more efficient electric vehicles saving on 
the carbon produced in the batteries in just two or three years17. Further carbon 
savings can be m ade when you consider the potential for  onward re -use of retired 
electric vehicle batteries for less demanding applications like stationary energy 
storage  in homes, workplaces or charging hubs .  
 
Action  Timescale  
Council wide   
6.1.1 Conduct  Green Fleet Review  to make business case and 
kick start switch to electric  vehicles  Short term  
6.1.2 With a grant obtained from LCC’s Choose How You Move 
scheme - purchase a small fleet of e -bikes for use by council 
employees as a pilot scheme initiative to promote s ustainable 
travel and healthy lifestyles and improve the wellbeing of  staff.  Short term  
6.1.3 Increase numbers of secure p ublic bike shelters  around 
the district  (Narborough station , Leisure centres,  car parks, 
council offices etc).  Short term  
6.1.4  Review of the  Council’s employee business travel and 
commuting to explore opportunities to switch to electric vehicles 
and the feasibility of this .  Short term  
6.1.5 Replace all council fleet vehicles (cars, vans, refuse lorries 
and other maintenance vehic les) with electric, hybrid or similar 
low/no carbon alternatives.  Medium – Long 
term 
6.1.6 Following scoping project install the appropriate electric 
vehicle charging points at the Depot and main offices  Short term  
6.1.7  Carry out a staff travel survey.  Allow ing us to estimate 
current trends and associated carbon emissions arising from 
staff commuting.  Short term  
6.1.8  Reduce staff commuting through promotion  and support of 
agile working . Short term  
6.1.9  Encourage the use of video conferencing and in vest in 
equipment to facilitate participation in digital meetings, thus 
reducing travel.  Ongoing  
District wide   
6.1.10  Walk and Ride Blaby – multi stakeholder approach to 
connect communities and places by creating and improving a 
sustainable transport n etwork focussing on walking and cycling 
and improving the health and wellbeing of residents.  Short term  
6.1.11  Develop a partnership with Electric Blue to deve lop a 
local Authority EV Strategy  to create a charg ing network across 
the district (public and p rivate car parks, petrol stations, on 
street)  Short term  
6.1.12  Specify an approach to electric charging infrastructure for 
homes and businesses in strategic plans . Short term  
6.1.13  Engage with the taxi drivers to encourage the switch to 
electric vehicl es. Short term  
6.1.14 Engage with and encourage  businesses to switch to 
electric vehicles. Lead by example  and provide information.   Short term  17 
 6.1.15  Work in partnership with neighbouring local authorities to 
deliver an EV charging network, share idea s and work 
collaboratively on other initiatives.  Short term  
6.1.16  Explore opportunities to increase the use public rail 
service s – Increasing the number of stops  by trains passing 
through Narborough Station.  Short term  
6.1.17  Submit application bid for  On Street Residential Charging 
Scheme (ORCS) to Office for Low Emission Vehicles (OLEV) to 
fund residential EV charging points across the district.  Ongoing (July 
2020)  
6.1.18  Submit bid in next round of the ‘Ultra Low Emission Taxi 
Infrastructure Scheme’  from OLEV.  Short term  
6.1.19 Ask for comments from residents via Council ’s Climate 
Change Website (with addition al publicity through 
Communications T eam)  in regard EV charging point network 
and feed into OLEV bid.  July 2020  
6.1.20 Explore potential to work in partnership with neighbouring 
authorities to connect cycle routes and investigate  new  funding 
streams that might be available by incorporating links to local 
history along cycle routes.    Medium term  
6.1.21  to use our influence/work with partner s to create secure 
cycle parking facilities at traffic -laden locations/destinations (eg: 
Fosse Park, Everards Meadows at Rutland Cycles), Grove 
Farm, Blaby Town Centre, etc  Short term  
 
6.2 Built Environment  
Over the coming decade s Blaby will have to drama tically improve the energy 
efficiency of all its buildings to reduce the demand for energy. As a district w e will 
need to reduce our reliance o n gas and instead  heat our buildings wit h low carbon 
alternatives such as heat pumps . We must change behaviours, embrace energy 
efficiency technologies and encourage the uptake of modern methods of construction 
in commercial and domestic buildings.  We must explore and take  opportunities to 
influence development through planning policy and the Local Plan and ensure th ese 
are in line with our carbon neutral commitments and the recommendations of the 
CCC report UK Housing - Fit For Future18 
 
Action  Timescale  
Council wide   
6.2.1  Conduct energy efficiency audit of main council offices  (Pick 
Everard)  Ongoing   
6.2.2  Identify options for r etrofit of existing council buildings to 
improve insulation, air tightness and install better windows. 
Improve the management of energy usage across our assets to 
highlight and reduce energy use.  Short term  
6.2.3  Replace existing gas b oilers at main offices with low carbon 
alternative and explore potential for the use of heat pumps.  Short term  
6.2.4  Identify way s and means of reducing  carbon footprint and 
energy efficiency of  our leased assets and use our influence as 
landlord to e nsure these are implemented. This applies in  
particular to Huncote and Enderby Leisure centres which are 
owned by Blaby District Council.  
 
 Medium term  18 
 District wide   
6.2.5 Promote the council’s collective switching initiative to 
minimis e residents’ fuel c osts and  encourage resident s to switch  
to 100% green tariff. Working with IChoosr to use direct mail  to 
increase uptake.  Ongoing (by Oct 
2020)  
6.2.6 Explore potential for joining Solar Together – a scheme for 
helping residents to install solar panels on their property.  This 
must be in collaboration with other local authorities.  Make contact 
with neighbouring authorities.  Ongoing 
(complete by Oct 
2020  if support is 
received ) 
6.2.7 Promote LEAP (Local Energy Advice Partnership) on our 
website which is a fr ee energy and money saving advice service 
for residents.  Short term  
6.2.8 Develop partnership with  HDC &  Harborough Energy   ECO 
Flex scheme to help p romote and encourage uptake of Warm 
Homes funding for low income/low EPC Homes. Tackle fuel 
poverty and in  turn improve the health and well -being of citizens 
by providing new heating systems, energy efficiency solutions 
and advice to households without them.  Short term  
6.2.9 Ensure th at Climate change is embedded in the 
development of  the New Local Plan to ensure  that it supports our 
aims for carbon reduction  and sustainable development  across 
the district.  Short term  
6.2.10 Introduce planning requirements for all future domestic 
housing in lin e with carbon neutral target and Committee on 
Climate Change (C CC) advice . New homes should deliver ultra -
high levels of energy efficiency as soon as possible and by 2025 
at the latest, consistent with a space heat demand of 15 -20 
kWh/m2/yr18. Passivhaus or equivalent should be considered and 
an assessment against Net  Zero Carbon should be required.  Short term  
6.2.11 Introduce planning requirements for all future non 
domestic bui ldings in line with t he carbon neutral t arget.  
Passivhaus or equivalent should be considered and an 
assessment against Net Zero Carbon should  be required.  Short term  
6.2.12 Consider Policy intervention to prevent the installation of 
any new fossil fuel heating sy stem (e.g.gas boilers)  on new 
developments  by a specified date.  Medium term  
6.2.13 Set up carbon offset fund to incentivise private developers 
to achieve greater carbon reductions on site while providing a 
fund for the sole purpose of delivering carbon reduction 
projects19. Medium term  
6.2.14 Work with developers and heating engineers to tackle the 
skills gap for renewable technologie s in the construction sector. 
Encourage re-training in low -carbon heating, energy and water 
efficiency, ventilation and thermal comfort, and property -level 
flood resilience. Inform of the planned phasing out of  gas boilers.  Short term  
6.2.15 Ensure buildi ng regulations standards are maintained and 
buildings are built as designed.    Short term  
6.3 Energy  
Since 2010, the UK electricity national grid CO2e conversion figures have decreased 
by 47%20. This trend is likely to continue as the mix of electricity  sources nationally 
become lower carbon with an ever greater proportion of our energy coming from 
renewable sources such as wind and solar.  However due to the limited grid capacity 19 
 to both store and transfer electrical energy  at a national level we will  need to take 
steps to significantly expand renewable sources of energy at a local level and build 
capacity to store that energy within the district. This will require significant investment 
in new and existing low carbon energy generating technologies.  
 
As of 2018, Blaby had 1345 Solar PV installations generating 10409 mWh of 
electricity21. If we ar e to succeed we must significantly increase our  local renewable 
energy generation, with a particular focus on small -medium scale Solar PV 
(Photovoltaic) installat ions c ombined with energy storage. We will aim to participate 
and lead on innovative solutions to energy generation and look to have a range of 
sources in place including energy from solar, waste, wind and ground source heat.  
 
Action  Timescale  
Council wid e   
6.3.1  Establish the Council’s carbon footprint and continue to monitor 
our green house gas emissions. Produce an annual Green House 
Gas Emissions Inventory.  Complete(18/19) 
Ongoing (19/20)  
6.3.2  Conduct a holistic energy opportunity assessment for D epot, 
main Office and closed landfill sites to identify measures that can be 
taken to reduce consumption and identify potential for local 
renewable energy solutions.  Short term  
6.3.3  Where viab le install Solar (PV)  on council buildings  Short term  
6.3.4  Explore potential for Solar ( PV) installations on leased assets.  Short term  
6.3.5  Switch to a 100% renewable ‘green’ electricity tariff  
6.3.5.1 – Explore switch to Green Gas.  Short term  
District wide   
6.3.6  The Council acknowledges that in order to achi eve the target of 
net-zero carbon emissions the district will need to generate much 
more energy from renewable sources. As such the Council is 
committed to working with its partners to identify and develop further 
suitable opportunities with a particular e mphasis on small -medium  
scale solar PV installations combined with energy storage  Medium term  
6.3.7  Through our new Local P lan ensure that new developments 
take advantage of Ground Source Heat Networks  Medium term  
6.3.8 Within the Local  Plan set an amb itious formal target for S olar 
(PV) capacity in Blaby District (study currently being investigated by 
planning policy team)  Long term  
6.3.9 Promote Ground Source heat pumps a s a viable and cost 
effective alternative to gas central heating.  Short term  
6.3.10 Explore potential for onshore wind installations within the 
district and if necessary lobby central government to change planning 
laws.  Short term  
6.3.11  There is a need to establish existing grid capacity within Blaby 
District for the purposes  of planning an  EV Charging network  and 
renewable energy projects . We will therefore commit to working with 
the local Distribution Network Operator to establish this  and feed this 
into our Local Plan .  Short term  
6.3.12  Engage with the public and private secto r to seek partners for 
a community renewable energy investment fund for large scale Solar 
PV projects.  Medium term  
 20 
  
6.4 Waste and Water  
In 2019/20, 34,750 tonnes of household waste was produced i n Blaby District of 
which approximately 42%  was recycled or  composted.  Action needs to be taken to 
reduce the volume of all waste , increase the re -use and recycling of waste , eliminate 
disposal to landfill and generate  energy from the remainder . We should also explore 
emerging technologies around the mining of ene rgy and resources from historic 
landfill sites.  We must also ensure both the supply and demand of water is managed 
in a more sustainable way.  
 
Action  Timescale  
Council wide   
6.4.1  Conduct a waste audit to better understand our sources 
of waste, i dentify  our recycling rate. Once known explore ways 
to minimise waste generated  from our own activities, increase 
recycling rates and set ambitious targets.  Short term 
6.4.2  Reduce the total volume of  waste we produce  and 
identify annual reduction targets  ongoi ng 
6.4.3  Review need for vending machines in light of Covid 19 
given reduction/absence of external meetings. Replace all 
existing vending machines which currently use non -recyclable 
cups  and s ingle use plastics with more sustainable  
alternatives . Short te rm 
6.4.4 Explore potential for food waste collection around main 
office and depot.  Short term  
6.4.5 Investigate the potential to include technologies to 
improve water efficiency within buildings, such as rainwater 
harvesting, grey water systems, flow reg ulators, water efficient 
toilets and showerheads.  Short term  
District wide   
6.4.6 Investigate alternative disposal routes for municipal 
waste with the aim of eliminating  waste to landfill  Short term  
6.4.7 Introduce food waste collection across the distr ict. Medium term  
6.4.8 Explore opportunity for alternative food waste disposal 
such as composting and  anaerobic digestion and its potential 
for energy generation.   
6.4.9 Target a 70 % Recycling rate for all domestic and non 
domestic waste by 2025 . Medium  term  
6.4.10 Target zero biodegradable waste to landfill by 2025  Medium term  
6.4.11 Investigate opportunities for more Anaerobic Digestion 
facilities within the district as a potential disposal route for food 
waste.  Medium term  
6.4.12 Explore potentia l for introducing  planning requirements 
for construction waste on new build projects that specifies 
recycling targets and diversion from landfill (links to carbon 
offsetting fund) .  Short term  
6.4.13 Explore  potential for food waste collection for 
busine sses across the district.  Short term  
6.4.14 Work with supermarkets to explore ways of reducing 
food waste to zero and consider/investigate working w ith social Short term  21 
 enterprise schemes example : The Real Junk food Project, 
Leicester –( reducing food waste and fe eding the hungry)  
6.4.15 Provide information to citizens and businesses on the 
best practices to reduce water consumption, helping to 
improve understanding of the issues and solutions to better 
water management, reducing bills and carbon emiss ions Short term  
6.4.16 Explore ways of encouraging the use of technology and 
to improve water  efficiency in buildings through the Local Plan.  Short term  
6.4.17 Work with partners to understand how and where Green 
and B lue infrastructure can improved  to manage water in more 
sustainable way within the district. Identify projects that 
conserve water and manage wetlands to reduce flood risk (e.g. 
room for water  in the Netherlands)  Short term  
6.4.18  Use our influence/work with supermarkets to explore 
ways  of reducing the use of single use plastic packaging – 
particularly for fruit/veg and fresh items.   Short term  
6.4.19  Explore potential for underground refuse systems in 
both new and existing developments. This would have the 
benefit of significantly re ducing the number of collections, 
mileage and staffing costs related to refuse collection service.  Medium term  
6.5 Resources and Consumption  
The embedded carbon  of the goods and services we buy have their own emissions 
and asso ciated carbon footprint. Th ey can account for up to 90% of an organisations 
total emissions. Food and drink in also have a big impact on our imported emissions. 
We must use our influence to reduce meat and dairy  consumption , increase  plant 
based food  production. Promoting  locally so urced produce, reducing food miles and 
sourcing from less energy intensive forms of farming will benefit the local economy 
and the health and wellbeing of our residents.   
 
Action  Timescale  
Council wide   
6.5.1  As a council , become single use plastic free by 2025 . Short term 
6.5.2  Conduct an analysis of our purchased goods and services to 
ascertain the associated carbon emissions and identify potential 
savings.  These are Scope 3 e missions which may account for up to 
90% of our carbon footprint.   
 Short te rm  
6.5.3  Engage with suppliers to reduce their carbon footprint and 
consider environmental performance when awarding contracts or 
making purchases . Consider ways environment impact can be 
assessed as part of the procurement process.  Short term  
District  wide  
6.5.4  Work with LCC to  reduce the meat content of meals served in 
schools and increase plant based and vegetarian choices in schools.  Short term  
 
 
 
 
 
 22 
 7. Air Quality  
The Local Air Quality Management System is governed by the Environment Act 
1995, as amended. Local authorities, including Blaby District Council, are required to 
assess air quality i n their area against nationally set Air Quality Objectives and 
designate Air Quality Management Areas (AQMAs) if improvements are necessary. 
Where an AQMA is designated, local authorities are required to produce an Air 
Quality Action Pla n (AQAP) d escribing the pollution reduction measures it will put in 
place.   
 
Since 1992, Blaby District Council has carried out air quality monitoring in various 
locations, prim arily for Nitrogen Dioxide associated with the roads in the District.  
AQMAs have been declared and a replacement AQAP is being developed alongside 
this Carbon Neutral Action Plan (CNAP).  
 
Each year an Annual Status Report (ASR) has to be completed, using a  template, 
and submitted to Defra. The ASR includes monitoring data and analysis, together 
with an update on actions being taken in relation to air quality.  
 
Local authorities are encouraged to publish Air Quality Strategies which can contain 
policies for wider measures. Blaby District Council has an Air Quality Strategy 2018 -
21. 
The 3 documents (AQAP, AQS, and C NAP) all contain actions designed to improve 
air quality. Therefore by operating collectively, there is increased potential to achieve 
improvements . Several of the actions that are in the Transport section above, which 
relate to reducing the need to use private transport and cleaner engines, are directly 
relevant to air quality. The AQAP will contain actions that are specific to the AQMAs 
and are les s useful to this Plan. Therefore the actions that appear in the table below 
are ones that are most relevant:  
Action  Timescale  
District wide   
7.1 Continue to deliver  project s to encourage active travel and car use 
reduction, targeting schools and then loc al businesses within and 
around the District’s AQMA’s partly in partnership with Leicestershire 
County Council.  Ongoing  
 
7.2 Continue to work closely with Leicestershire County Council and 
Leicester City Council to manage  the air quality impacts of the l ocal 
road network with the District . Ongoing  
7.3 Continue to work closely with Highways England to manage  the air 
quality impacts of their roa ds within the District.  Ongoing  
7.4 Continue to work closely with all Leicestershire authorities, 
including Leic ester City Council, Leicestershire County Council 
(various sections including highways and transportation, public health, 
and sustainability), Highways England, the Environment Agency, and 
Public Health England This collective working improves understandin g 
and seeks to maximise the benefits of various work streams . Ongoing  
7.5 Share Air Quality data with parishes, partners and residents, 
providing transparent information on what our monitoring is telling us 
so they feel informed . Ongoing  23 
 7.6 Integrate th e guidance produced by the East Midlands Air Quality 
Network into planning related documents as appropriate . This 
guidance is in the form of a toolbox and is intended to promote a more 
consistent set of policies across the Region .  Short term  
7.7 Consider  the noise and Air Quality implications of a variety of 
planning applications , when consulted , and  ensure that impacts of 
proposed schemes are mitigated as far as possible . Ongoing  
8. Biodiversity  
Increasing biodiversity goes hand in hand wit h our carbon ne utral ambitions.  
Biodiversity net gain is referenced strongly in the National Planning Policy 
Framework ( NPPF ) 2019 . The environmental test of sustainable development 
requires planning policy and planning decisions to help to ‘improve biodiversity’ . 
Delive ring biodiversity net gain will have the knock on benefit  of enhancing our green 
spaces and increasing carbon sequestration.   
Action  Timescale  
Council wide   
8.1 Diversify amenity grass areas to create wildflower meadows, 
creating Bee Friendly Habitats a nd increase biodiversity.  
 Short term  
District wide   
8.2 Work w ith farmers and landowners to increase  or enhance 
hedgerows, meadows, and other habitat resources that con tribute to 
biodiversity  net gain . Short term  
8.3 Work with partn ers to explore ways we can increase Biodiversity 
and the ecological value of our SSSI’s  (Sites of Special Scientific 
Interest)  and Nature Reserve s (e.g. Narborough Bog, Croft Quarry)   Short term  
8.4 Develop local policies in line with NPPF that conserve, enhance  or 
restore p riority  habitats , ecological networks and protect priority 
species.  Specify 10%  biodiversity net gain in the  Local Plan.  Short term  
9. Governance , Funding and Engagement  
Achieving our target to be carbon neutral as a council by 2030 and district wide by 
2050  or earlier will not be possible through a ‘business as usual’ approach. We will 
need to find innovative ways of working.  The list of actions set out in this plan are not 
exhaustive and  additional measures will inevitably come to  light in the future. 
Howev er they are a starting point and they provide some perspective  on the  scale of 
the task in hand and will inform how we allocate resource s to tackle the global 
climate emergency.  
Action  Timescale  
Council wide   
9.1 To work with our Green Champion and membe rs of scrutiny to 
ensure we have cross party representation in championing carbon 
savings, scrutinis ing  decision making and steer ing  further carbon 
saving initiatives and ideas.  Short term  24 
 9.2 Introduce a ‘Carbon Impact Assessment’ procedure – a new 
assessment which requires all Council key decisions to be assessed 
for their  potential carbon implications and therefore support the 
council’s carbon neutral aims.  Short term  
9.3 Develop our Green Champions to represent the Council’s various 
service areas . These individuals are responsible for raising awareness 
of key initiatives and embedding change. A key focus for the 
Champions moving forward will be to develop and deliver a 
programme of behavioural change activities to result in actions that will 
direc tly reduce carbon emissions across the Council’s estate. Ongoing 
– further resource and budget needed to support this work.  Short term  
9.4 Run carbon literacy training for Green Champions, council staff 
and elected members to help educate wider staff on h ow they can help 
reduce their carbon impact, reduce energy use, minimise waste and 
improve sustainability . APSE online training.  Short term  
9.5 Ensure cou ncil’s investments are placed with  environmentally and 
socially responsible projects/comp anies . Short te rm  
District wide   
9.6 Working with willing Parish Councils, to prepare a template pari sh 
based Carbon Neutral Action Plan , and subsequently encouraging all 
Parish Councils to come up with their own targets and projects.  Short term  
9.7 Continue with and  build on our work with schools and the youth 
council to deliver workshops and engage with young people.  Ongoing  
9.8 Citizen Engagement – Create dedicated Climate Change  web 
page that provide s accurate and up to date information on its carbon 
management a ctions and raise awareness of climate change through 
local media.  Short term  
9.9 Produce  a carbon calculator for the website to allow residents to 
quantify their own impact.  Short term  
9.10 Schools – While they are not under our control we will seek to 
influence and raise awareness of their own impact and what they can 
do to be more energy efficient and reduce their energy consumption 
and emissions.  Short term  
9.11 Continue to work across boundaries with a wide network of local 
authorities to share exp ertise and work in par tnership as part of the 
local Energy Hub  and East Midlands  Sustainability Officers Group . Ongoing  
9.12 Hold a Citizens A ssembly on climate change to allow 
representation from across the district to engage and contribute to 
actions.  Short term  
9.13 Engage with local businesses  to raise awareness of Net Zero 
Carbon. (Business Breakfast)   Short  term 
9.14 Engage with owners and occupiers of local business and retail 
parks (Fosse  Shopping Park , Meridian  Business Park  and Grove  
Park) to discuss potential for Solar PV installations  and EV Charging 
points.   Short term  
9.15 On-Street Residential Chargepoint  Scheme Grant  (ORCS) 
Funding from OLEV – Submit bid.  Ongoing -
complete by 
end of June.  
9.16 Explore opportunities for funding from Sali x Finance. Salix , who 
are funded by BEIS , provide interest free government loans for local 
authorities  to fund energy efficiency projects across their estates. This 
could be considered to address the  findings from Project Alpha  with 
regard to energy effici ency/retrofit of main offices . Short term  25 
 9.17 Consider action to form a lobby group including all City and 
County MPs to challenge Defra Air Quality standards and to form 
unitary agencies to both measure and enforce air quality standards.  Short term  
10. Carbon Offsetting  
This section focusses on carbon capture and offsetting those residual greenhouse 
gases that cannot be completely removed. Whilst there are likely to be new negative 
emission technologies that emerge over the coming decades we cannot rely  on these.  
We must therefore also focus on methods that are available to us now.  
 Local carbon offsetting  
 Carbon Capture  
 Large scale carbon offsetting  
 
A carbon offset is a reduction in emissions of carbon dioxide or other greenhouse 
gases made in order t o compensate for emissions made elsewhere. This may 
include tree planting, woodland and parks management which will increase the 
capture of CO 2 via sequestration and help to achieve our carbon neutral 
commitments.  
Whilst we will identify potential offsetti ng practices to help Blaby District’s carbon 
neutral am bition. We will not be actively promoting  these above actions to reduce 
carbon emissions directly. Blaby’s carbon budget currently assumes that we will not 
be using technologies to remove CO 2 from the atmosphere  as these are currently 
unproven at scale and relying on them would create uncertainties in our contribution 
to future climate change action.  
 
Theoretically, if these technologies were to become widel y available and used, 
Blaby ’s carbon budget wo uld become bigger. However,  it is important th at we do  not 
assume this before these technologies become well proven, otherwise we risk 
contributing to a warmer world.  
 
Action  Timescale  
Council wide   
10.1 Explore potential  for funding carbon offset proje cts within the 
district to offset  those council emissions that  cannot yet be fully 
mitigated.  Medium 
term 
District wide   
10.2 Determine whether a district  carbon off -setting programme can be 
put in place and to examine the viability of potential carbon s avings 
from tree planting.  Short term  
10.3 Encourage the planting of more trees and hedgerows on farmland 
to improve carbon sequestration.  Short term  
10.4 Explore opportunities to work with landowners  and the National 
Farmers Union  to promote agroforestr y, forest carbon capture 
schemes and carbon credits.  Short term  
 
 
 
 26 
 11.   Resilience and Adaptation  
 
This section will address the actions that Blaby must take to protect the district and 
its residents against the harmful impacts of climate change that are no w unavoidable. 
We are already beginning to experience localised flooding and extreme 
temperatures.  
 
The Council also acknowledges that in recognising there is a global climate 
emergency, the actions needed to be taken are not all about mitigating the impac ts, 
but also adapting to the inevitable changes of climate change.  
The Council’s Local Plan has contained policies relatin g to flooding for many years.  
The current one is within the adopted Core Strategy: Policy CS22 – Flood Risk 
Management : 
‘To minimise the risk of flooding (and other hazards) to property, infrastructure and 
people ’ 
The planning team regularly consult the Environmental Services Team on a variety of 
planning applications for flooding and drainage, which do not fall with the remits of 
the E nvironment Agency or Local Lead Flood Authority. The information submitted, 
which can include a Flood Risk Assessment, is considered and comments sent to the  
relevant planning case officer  
Action  Timescale  
Council wide   
11.1Seek to introduce policies in the Local Plan that require design 
measures that  build resilience for heatwaves.  Short term  
11.2 Ensure core council services are resilient and ada ptable to  
extreme weather events . Ongoing  
11.3 Ensure that all post Covid 19 recovery plans and associated 
decisions to be assessed for their potential carbon implications and 
therefore support the council’s carbon neutral aims.  Short  term 
District wide   
11.4 Reduce the number of homes and businesses , across the district 
that are exposed to flood risk . Short term 
11.5 Maintain robust planning measures to ensure that flood risk 
implications are considered in applications .   Short term  
11.6 Understand the current and future risk of extreme weather events 
to the most vulnerable citizens.  Short term  
11.7 Look at scope to expand  and enhance  natural floo d plains and 
wetlands to provide additional natural flood storage in such a way that 
protects properties and increases biodiversity.  Short term  
 
12.  Monitoring and evaluation  
The UK Government department BEIS (Depar tment for Business, Energy and 
Industrial Strategy) annually release local authority carbon emissions  each summer.  
At the end of each financial year, Blaby District  Council’s own emissions and those of 
the whole district will assessed against the pathways and allocated carbon budget to 
assess progress towards carbon neutrality. Also a review of the action plan will 
inform an understanding of the anticipated carbon saved. The related year’s carbon 27 
 emissions will not be published by BEIS until two years later  due to the data lag (e.g. 
short term actions in 2020/21 will not be in the released reported emissions until 
2022).  
To ensure all service areas are involved in delivery, the actions specified in this 
document will be entered into an excel spreadsheet to c reate a simple live matrix so 
that departments and services can easily see what actions are applicable to them  
and update accordingly . Progress will  be recorded on the matrix throughout the year   
and action s updated within the Carbon Neutral Management Pla n during it’s annual 
review.  
Action  Timescale  
Council wide   
12.1 Carry out annual review of CNAP  March 2021  
12.2 Develop a working  spreadsheet/matrix for use across 
departments and services to allow for live tracking  progress  and 
updating actions.  Sept 2020  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 28 
 Glossary of terms  
 
1.50C Temperature rise  - This refers to the rise in the average global temperature 
above the pre -industrial period (pre -1750) . 
Adaptation  - Actions to reduce vulnerability to climate change impacts,  reducing its 
effects on social, economic and natural systems . 
Biodiversity  - The variety of animal and plant life on Earth . 
Business as usual  - Future emissions trend if the current state of affairs continue as 
they are today . 
Carbon budget  - The maximum amount of carbon dioxide that can be emitted to be 
in line with keeping temperatures well below 20C and pursue a 1.50C limit to rising 
temperatures . 
Carbon dioxide (CO 2) - A key greenhouse gas with a long -lifetime in the 
atmosphere and both natural and hum an sources.  
Carbon neutral  - Having no net release of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere . 
Climate change  - The long term change of climate, typically measured over decades 
or longer. This is different to weather, which is now.  
Climate emergency  - Climate c hange presents the greatest threat to life: on the 
economy, social well -being and the natural environment . 
CO2e  - Carbon dioxide equivalence; this includes all greenhouse gasses converted 
into the equivalent amount of carbon dioxide.  
Decarbonisation  - reducing the carbon intensity of energy in the national grid, this is 
achieved by reducing the proportion of fossil fuels and increasing the proportion of 
renewable energy sources such as solar and wind.  
Ecosystem  - Community of living organisms and the natura l environment  
Global warming  -  Increase in temperature of the Earth’s atmosphere over long 
timescales, caused by increased levels of greenhouse gasses . 
Greenhouse gas (GHG)  - The Earth can maintain a regular average temperature 
(about 150C) despite heat l eaving the planet’s surface because a layer of gases in 
the atmosphere absorb and release heat – a process known as the greenhouse 
effect. Greenhouse gases are those that have this effect, each with differing lifetimes 
and abilities to capture heat (infrar ed radiation).  
MtCO 2 - Millions of tonnes of carbon dioxide  
PV – Photovoltaics (Solar Panels)  
Resilience  - The ability of a system and its component parts to anticipate, absorb, 
accommodate, or recover from the effects of a hazardous event in a timely and 29 
 efficient manner, including through ensuring the preservation, restoration, or 
improvement of its essential basic structures and functions  
Sustainability  - Meeting the needs of current generations, without compromising 
future generations or the natural env ironment  
Upstream/Downstream emissions  - Upstream applies to suppliers of the 
organisation. Downstream, to the organisation’s customers. The term covers the 
emissions from the movement of goods by land, sea and air. It also includes 
emissions from third -party services along the supply chain  
BEIS (2019a). Environmental Reporting Guidelines: Including streamlined energy 
and carbon reporting guidance .[online] Available at: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/environmental -reporting-
guidelinesincluding -mandatory -greenhouse -gas-emissions -reporting -guidance  
BEIS (2019b) UK Government GHG Conversion Factors for Company Reporting 
2018: full set for all users. [online]  
Available at: https://www.gov.uk/gove rnment/collections/government -conversion -
factors -for-company -reporting  
BEIS (2019c). UK local authority and regional carbon dioxide emissions national 
statistics: 2005 to 2017. [online]  Available at: 
https://www.gov.uk/governmen t/statistics/uk -local-authority -and-regional -carbon -
dioxideemissions -national -statistics -2005 -to-2017  
IPCC (2018). Global Warming of 1.5°C: An IPCC Special Report on the impacts of 
global warming of 1.5°C above preindustrial levels and related global gree nhouse 
gas emission pathways, in the context of strengthening the global response to the 
threat of climate change, sustainable development, and efforts to eradicate poverty. 
[online] available at: https://www.ipcc.ch/sr15  
 
Refer ences  
 
1. Climate Change Act 2008. The world’s first long term legally binding framework to 
tackle the dangers of climate change. The Climate Change Bill was introduced into 
Parliament on 14 November 2007 and became law on 26th November 2008.  
 
2. WWF state s that if everybody in the world lived as the average EU resident, we 
would have exhausted nature’s budget for 2019 by 10 May 2019, and would need 
2.8 planets to sustain us. (WWF, 2019)  
 30 
 3. https://www.metoffice.gov.uk/research/a pproach/collaboration/ukcp/about  
 
4. 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attach
ment_data/file/758983/Climate_change_impacts_and_adaptation.pdf  
 
5. The ma in GHGs are: carbon dioxide (CO 2), methane (CH 4), nitrous oxide (N 2O), 
hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), perfluorocarbons ( PFCs), sulphur hexafluoride (SF 6) and 
Nitrogen Trifluoride (NF 3). The Kyoto Protocol – the international agreement 
addressing climate change - covers these seven main GHGs. Th e last four are 
fluorinated gases ("F -gases") which are a range of man -made compounds (i ncluding 
HFCs, PFCs, SF 3 and NF 3) used in a variety of industries including refrigeration, air -
conditioning and the manufacture of cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, electroni cs and 
aluminium. F -gases are extremely potent greenhouse gases with some having 
GWPs of several thousand or more (BEIS, 2019a). The greenhouse gases covered 
by the Kyoto Protocol account for over 99% of global greenhouse gas emissions.  
 
6. Using CO2e as a  measuring tool means that the different global warming potential 
(GWP) of different gases are taken into account. Quantities of GHGs are multiplied 
by their GWP to give results in units of carbon dioxide equivalent (CO2e)  
 
7. Global warming potential. A f actor describing the radiative force impact (degree of 
harm to the atmosphere) of one unit of a given GHG relative to one unit of CO2.  
 
8. Decarbonisation means reducing the carbon intensity of energy in the national 
grid, this is achieved by reducing the proportion of fossil fuels and increasing the 
proportion of renewable energy sources such as solar and wind.  
 
9. Emissions are from the SCATTER inventory tool and reported as CO2 
equivalences www.scattercities.com  
 
10. Imported consumption emissions have been calculated based on a per  capita 
allocation of data from 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attach
ment_data/file/794557/Consumption_emissions_April19.pdf  
 31 
 11. Based on Office of National Statistics (ONS) UK 2018 population for Blaby 
District (100,421)  
 
12. https://www.gov.uk/government/statistical -data-sets/total -final-energy -
consumption -at-regional -and-local-authority -level 
 
13. https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/environmental -reporting -guidelines -
including -mandatory -greenhouse -gas-emissions -reporting -guidance  
 
14. https://carbonbudget.manchester.ac.uk/reports/E07000129 / 
 
15. www.scattercities.com  
 
16. https://www.theccc.org.uk/publication/net -zero-the-uks-contribution -to-stopping -
global -warming/  
 
17. https://www.drax.com/press_release/ev -battery -emissions -offset -by-lower -
carbon -electricity -system/  
 
18. https://www.theccc.org.uk/wp -content/uploads/2019/02/UK -housing -Fit-for-the-
future -CCC -2019.pdf  
 
19. 
https://www.london.gov.uk/sites/ default/files/carbon_offsett_funds_guidance_2018.p
df 
 
20. https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/government -conversion -factors -for-
company -reporting  
 
21. This uses a range of BEIS data released in 2019 for 2017 Consumption, and 
2018 datasets were avai lable for renewable generation. 22 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/sub -national -electricit y-and-gas-
consumption -statistics -analysis -tool and 
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/regional -renewable -statistics  32 
  
22. https://archiv e.ipcc.ch/pdf/special -reports/srex/SREX -Annex_Glossary.pdf  
 
 