Carbon 
Reduction
2019 - 2030Plan2Foreword	 3
Induction	and	 Vision	 4-5
Policy	Drivers	 6
Policy	Statement	 7-9
Current	Emmissions	and	 Targets	 10-11
Carbon	Reduction	Plan	 12
Theme	1	–	Sustainable	Buildings	and	 Workplaces	 13-18
Theme	2	–	Renewable	Energy	 19-22
Theme	3	–	Low	Carbon	Fleet	 23-26
Theme	4	–	 Transport	 27-30
Theme	5	–	Planning	 31-36
Theme	6	–	Community	and	Collaboration	 37-40
Theme	7	–	Biodiversity	 41-44
Theme	8	–	Procurement	 45-47
Performance	Managament	 48-49Contents3Foreword
Our aspiration is for our district to 
continue to grow in economic prosperity, however this will have an impact on demand for energy, infrastructure and resources.  Business growth, new homes and the need for an increasing population to travel will increase consumption - a prosperous economy, at first glance, can appear at odds with an equal aspiration for carbon reduction.  
We believe that climate change is the 
most pressing issue confronting our communities today.  Climate change is 
already happening and further climate 
change is inevitable.  A reliance on energy 
that will become increasingly scarce and unreliable is not an option, in the case of oil, gas and other fossil fuels, it is finite and its use produces harmful and polluting gases.  There is ever growing evidence that our use of these energy sources, either directly or indirectly, is having a profound effect on our environment, our health today and in  the future. 
As a district we need to find ways to 
achieve carbon reduction whilst balancing this with our need for economic growth and the prosperity of our communities.  We need to reduce our reliance on climate damaging energy and change the way we operate better utilising more environmentally sustainable materials, products and practices in a move to a lower carbon lifestyle.   
We need to access renewable power such 
as water, solar, wind, air and geological sources.  At the same time we need to reduce the amount of power we need by properly insulating our buildings, by utilising the latest technologies, by educating ourselves and others, by simply 
being more careful with our use of 
resources and by finding more efficient 
ways of doing things.
Our Council is committed to this challenge 
and the principle of carbon reduction, this plan sets out how we aim to work with our partners, business and our communities to achieve this.  
Cllr Ann Syrett 
Council LeaderCllr Brian Watson 
Portfolio holder for 
Finance and Resources  
and Sustainable Energy4Introduction and Vision
Carbon footprint is the overall amount 
of climate change gas emissions, consisting of primarily carbon dioxide, associated with an organisation, event or production, it is one of the most common measures of our effect on the environment.  An increase in climate change gas emissions, and therefore rising carbon footprint, is the primary cause associated with climate change and 
its negative impacts.
Rising temperatures are changing the 
growing patterns of plants and crops, 
sea levels are rising too with polar ice 
caps melting resulting in coastal erosion 
and the destruction of ecosystems.  As vegetation growth patterns change and sea temperatures rise, wildlife that depends upon these will become threatened having a profound effect on the feeding patterns of many animals, birds, mammals, fish, insects and other organisms around the world creating a devastating imbalance to the natural order of life.Our increased carbon footprint has the 
potential to cause direct harm to human 
health too.  A rising climate impacts upon the food chain as we know it and will bring about an increase in malnutrition caused by the effects on food crops from increased periods of drought, this will also bring with it secondary effects such as increased diseases due to reducing access to safe water.  Diseases such as malaria are increasing as the temperatures in parts of the world rise which were previously too cold for mosquitoes to survive and declining air quality has caused an increase in respiratory problems such as asthma and allergies.
There is growing global awareness of 
the effect of our carbon footprint on the planet, along with a growing appetite to reduce it.  A reversal of these negative effects upon our planet requires a global effort, however, global change can only happen if individuals, communities and countries are prepared to change and have the opportunity to change.  
5When thinking about carbon reduction, 
this can perhaps appear overwhelming due to the varied nature and scale of the challenge, however it doesn’t have to be complicated.  By applying the same simple principles and asking some very basic questions, solutions can emerge in almost every scenario;
• REDUCE - consumables, energy, travel, 
waste
• REUSE -  renewable energy, materials, products, equipment
• RECYCLE - water, waste, bi-products 
• RETHINK - can we do something different? Do we need to do it at all?
Local authorities are well placed to influence change in our areas by being community leaders, raising awareness about the potential to reduce emissions and by working collaboratively with others to reduce emissions.  Through the services that we deliver, by being a major employer and through our regulatory and strategic functions, our organisation can and should be at the forefront and leading on the changes that are required to protect our present and future communities, countries and planet.     
Our vision
“A district that balances economic prosperity with environmental sustainability, improving the lives of our people and our environment today and in the future” 
6Kyoto Protocol
The UK is committed to the Kyoto 
Protocol – an international treaty which considers climate change.  The protocol commits countries to adopt an urgent approach to reducing their greenhouse gas emissions.  The aim of the protocol was to provide countries upholding the United Nations Framework Convention 
on Climate Change (UNFCCC) the option 
to execute methods of setting targets to 
control and measure the production of 
greenhouse gases within the country.
The Climate Change Act 
2008
The Climate Change Act 2008 makes the UK the first country to have a legally binding long-term framework to cut carbon emissions.  It also creates a framework for building the UK’s ability to adapt to climate change.  Tha Act requires that emissions be reduced by at least 80% by 2050, set against 1990 levels.
The Carbon Plan
In December 2011 the Government developed the Carbon Plan with proposals for achieving reductions and meeting the 2050 target.  This plan is in accordance with the Climate Change Act 2008 and determines the ways in which the emission reduction targets will be achieved.Sustainable Community Strategy 2005 - 2020
Bolsover Partnership brings together the main service providers and agencies within the Bolsover area in an effort 
to drive local regeneration and service 
improvement.  The partnership includes; 
public, private, community and voluntary 
sectors working together to achieve the 
Sustainable Community Strategy Vision 
for the benefit of local people.
The Bolsover Sustainable Community 
Strategy vision is “a diverse, healthy, fair and prosperous district, building on strengths of our industrial past to become 
a vibrant, thriving community capable of 
meeting the challenges and opportunities 
of the future.”
The Partnership includes a number 
of thematic areas including; Housing, Environment, Energy and Climate Change.
Bolsover District Council Corporate Plan 2015 - 2019
The Bolsover District Council Corporate Plan has four key aims; Unlocking Our Growth Potential, Providing Our Customers with Excellent Service, Supporting our Communities to be Healthier, Safer, Cleaner, Greener and Transforming Our Organisation.Policy Drivers7
Bolsover District Council has for a number 
of years prioritised carbon reduction within its operation, the outcomes of this are evident in our past and current carbon emissions levels.  
This plan seeks to build upon these 
successes brought about by the adoption of Council Policy in 2010;
Bolsover District Council  Energy Management Policy
Declaration of Commitment
Bolsover District Council is committed to 
working towards reducing energy usage and its carbon footprint. In particular the authority will seek to minimise the adverse environmental effects from the use of fossil fuels within Council activities.
The Council recognises that it can have a 
direct impact on energy consumption by reducing the Council’s use of energy in carrying out its functions e.g. heating and lighting corporate buildings, transport etc.
Objectives
Wherever practical the Council will take a proactive and responsible approach to implement the following objectives for the effective management and conservation of energy:1. Monitoring energy and water consumption
Energy and water use within the Councils Corporate buildings will be periodically monitored and reported, with particular focus on the most energy intensive premises. Where practicable targets will be set to improve energy performance within the buildings consumption of electricity, fossil fuels and water. Various monetary savings have been built into this year’s budget to reflect anticipated climate change targets, e.g. 3% year on year saving on emissions from Local Authority (LA) operations
2. Reducing carbon emissions
Supporting international/national policies and local energy efficiency targets for reducing energy related carbon dioxide emissions within Council premises and operations. Investigate, and where beneficial, implement practical solutions to improve energy efficiency. The authority has committed to reducing its carbon emissions by 3% year on year.Policy Statement83. Enhancing the built 
environment
Incorporating economic energy efficient systems within the design, construction, refurbishment and maintenance of 
corporate buildings and domestic housing 
stock. 
4. Energy Procurement
Purchasing energy jointly with other 
authorities via an approved framework deal giving due consideration to best value, cost and environmental implications. Promote sustainable procurement through the purchase of energy efficient goods & services to support the Councils operations as outlined on a product by product basis in the Green Procurement Guide.
5. Energy advice and education
Raising staff awareness by providing energy/transport efficiency advice, and by the promotion and development of a culture of responsible energy use throughout the Bolsover District Council. Eco driving lessons are being organised for both depot staff and staff with the highest business mileage at Sherwood lodge. Other employees will hopefully have the opportunity to try the eco driving simulator provided by Energy Saving Trust (EST). A series of training sessions are to begin soon for staff. The training will help staff reduce both their own energy usage and that of residents they may come into contact with. ‘ERIC’ (staff intranet) will include hints and tips for staff to further reduce their usage in 2010 and will include links to other websites for further advice.
6. Renewable Energy
Identify opportunities for utilizing renewable and environmentally conscious energy sources within the Councils 
corporate and housing stock properties.  
Promote the installation and adoption of energy efficient, low carbon or energy generating systems. Expand to refer to 
existing measures, e.g. photovoltaic (PV) 
system at Sherwood Lodge, ground source 
heat pump at Pleasley Vale Greaseworks, existing measures at Depot and any additional works we are investigating / considering
7. Transportation
Recognising the energy impact of transport generated by the activities of the Council, including commuting and business travel and, where practical, working to reduce that impact. Consider fuel efficiency and emissions when procuring new or replacement fleet vehicles. Where appropriate implement measures to improve the fuel economy of existing council vehicles.  EST have undertaken a Green Fleet review and a Freight Transport Association Audit has also been completed for larger vehicles. 10% saving is expected to be achieved on fuel usage by improved driver training for smaller vehicles. More energy efficient vehicles will be procured in the future, e.g. “A” to ”C” rated vehicles for smaller vehicles and Euro vi for the larger fleet.9
8. Partnership Working
Working with key partners, including 
other Local Authorities and external organisations, to implement and communicate the energy policy objectives.
Networking with other “Energy Groups” 
including the Carbon Trust, Bolsover
Energy Partnership and Energy Savings 
Trust to maximise the benefits of external grants and resource support programmes. We are also engaged in the East Midlands Public reporting pilot where local authorities will publicly report on progress against climate change objectives, including energy management. 10As a first step towards achieving our 
carbon reduction aspiration, we need to 
understand what emissions are caused by 
our activities.
Quantifying our climate change gas 
emissions will help our organisation 
understand what our key emissions sources are, how our organisation contributes to global emissions, and what opportunities we have to reduce our emissions.  
When quantifying our current climate 
change gas emissions and setting targets 
for future emissions reduction, we have focussed on three distinct areas;• Direct emissions that result from our day to day activities within our control, 
these include, but are not limited 
to; consumables, fuel usage, vehicle 
types, building construction, building 
operation, procurement, management, 
systems, procedures and practices etc.
• Indirect emissions from energy that we purchase.  Although we are not directly in control of the emissions, by using the 
energy we are indirectly responsible for 
the release of carbon dioxide. 
• Other indirect emissions from sources outside of our control.  Examples might include; employee work related travel, purchased goods.Current Emissions and Targets
CO2
tonnes
       2013          2014                    2015                2016         2017
BDC curr ent and historical emissions01000200030004000500060007000
BDC current historical emissions11
Understanding this has allowed us to develop this carbon reduction plan in which we 
identify ways to reduce our carbon footprint and limit emissions from future activity whilst measuring our progress against targets throughout the lifetime of the plan.Fleet
15%Buildings and 
Workplace
70%
01020304050607080
2018       2020       2025        2030        2035        2040        2045       205010%20%50%80%
BDC emissions r eduction target BDC emissions reduction targetBDC largest emissions sources12Local authorities have influence across 
a range of sectors, including waste collection and disposal, housing, environment and transport.  We have a large stock of buildings and workplaces and we are the custodians of many parks, open spaces and semi-rural land.  
Local authorities are also responsible 
for the production of local development plans and play a major role in driving economic growth and local regeneration.
As community leaders, local authorities also 
have the opportunity to raise awareness about the potential to reduce emissions in our communities and to work in partnership and collaboration with a variety of stakeholders to deliver emissions reduction.
By exercising these functions and having 
influence in these areas in a way that results in emissions reductions, there is the potential for a range of economic and social benefits for our organisation and our communities.  These include, but are not limited to, the following:
• Reduction in fuel poverty and improved 
energy affordability through energy efficiency improvements in the residential sector.
• Cost savings and environmental improvement through energy efficient and sustainable buildings and workplaces.
• Cost savings and environmental improvement through use of renewable energy.
• Cost savings and environmental 
improvement through waste reduction, 
increased recycling and use of lower 
carbon fleet.• Infrastructure improvements through planning which support sustainable travel and living.
• Environments which have improved biodiversity value including; parks, open spaces and areas of semi  
natural status.
• Development and support of local skills 
and job creation through economic development and  sustainable procurement.
This plan sets out 8 Thematic Areas by which our organisation aims to reduce  
our carbon emissions over the next  
decade or so:
• Theme 1 –  Sustainable Buildings  
 and Workplaces
• Theme 2 –  Renewable Energy
• Theme 3 –  Low Carbon Fleet
• Theme 4 –  Transport
• Theme 5 –  Planning
• Theme 6 –  Community and    
 Collaboration
• Theme 7 –  Biodiversity
• Theme 8 –  Procurement
Knowledge, awareness, technology, 
products and regulation in these areas are evolving at a rapid pace, therefore, this document and the action plan/targets within will be reviewed and updated regularly – it will be a ‘dynamic’ plan that will change and flex as new opportunities arise which support and possibly further our ambition for carbon reduction.Carbon Reduction Plan13
Theme one:
Sustainable 
Buildings and 
Workplaces14Theme 1 - Sustainable 
Buildings and Workplaces
According to the latest statistics, buildings in the UK account for about 43% of all carbon emissions, naturally therefore, having a focus on our buildings and workplaces will be key to our carbon reduction ambition.  
There is a potentially important role for 
local authorities both in raising awareness of opportunities externally and delivering schemes directly.  As well as our corporate offices, our own estate comprises a wide range of buildings with varying types of usage and energy demand (e.g. leisure centres, depots’, sheltered housing and housing stock).
Sustainable buildings and workplaces 
incorporate design, construction and operational practices that significantly reduce or eliminate our carbon footprint.  Along with buildings and workplaces, the local authority has an opportunity 
to influence the sustainability of its own 
housing stock which is growing, and that 
of the new build housing in the private sector through the planning process.
The Arc, Clowne15
The opportunities for carbon reduction 
through design and construction of new buildings and workplaces is clear, however, through re-design, retro fitting and operational practices, the opportunities become ever greater.
By reducing energy and water usage, 
minimising waste through our operations, using renewable energy and energy efficient technology and practices, we will see improved efficiency, reduced operating costs and reduced environmental impact.
Progress to date
• Light Emitting Diode (LED) lighting in The Arc.
• Intelligent lighting at The Arc.• Replaced thousands of coal fired council owned housing stock heating systems with funded gas systems.
• Infrared heating installed at Pleasley Vale business park.
• Voltage optimisation systems at the Arc and Riverside Depot.
• Rainwater harvesting at the Riverside Depot.
• Riverside Depot green roof and low carbon design.
• Level 4 Code of Sustainable Homes (CSH) low carbon and ecologically designed housing stock.  
• Sustainable retrofitting works to housing stock such as New Bolsover.
Depot16
• All commercial stock has at least a 
Display Energy Certificates (DEC) certificate.
• Commercial stock containing photovoltaic cells (PV) or renewables has a full commercial Energy Performance Certificate (EPC).
• All housing stock offered up for rent or sale has an Energy Performance Certificate.
• Energy Company Obligation (ECO) funding for New Bolsover scheme.
• Currently have recycle facilities in all offices and buildings.
• Installed solar thermal heated water 
system at Riverside Depot.
• Installed building energy management 
system at the Arc.
The TangentCase Study
The Tangent Business  
Centre
This multi occupation managed business centre constructed in 2012 achieved a BREEAM (Building Research Establishment Environmental Assessment Method) ‘Excellent’ 
rating confirming its credentials as 
a sustainable and energy efficient 
development. 
Environmental / efficiency measures 
incorporated included:
• Solar PV (Photovoltaic) panels 
providing a sustainable source of green renewable energy.
• LED lighting which represents an approximate 60% efficiency saving when compared to traditional fluorescent fittings.
• Underfloor heating system providing a comfortable constant temperature.
• Trespa cladding on the building façade, requiring no chemical cleaning products to maintain.
• Provision of facilities including cycle storage and showers to encourage people to cycle to work, reducing the impact of vehicle usage.17
 Ref Activity Lead Timescale  Resources Cost/benefit CO2 reduction target
       2020 2025  2030 
	S4	 Introduce	LED	lighting		 HOS	P&E	 	Sept	2019	 Officer	time	 Reduction	on	energy	 20%	 25%	 30%	
	 	 throughout	all	council		 	 	 and	£000	–		 consumption. 	
	 	 buildings	and		 	 	 equipment	 Measure; 	baseline	
	 	 workplaces.	 		 	 and	set	up	 energy	consumption	
	 	 	 	 	 	 at	point	of	installation.
	S5	 Develop		 SAMT	 Sept	2019	 Officer	time	 Reduction	on	paper		 30%	 50%	 75%	
	 	 comprehensive		 	 	 and	£000	–		 consumption	
	 	 ‘paperless’	plan.	 	 	 equipment	and		 Measure; 	baseline	
	 	 	 	 	 set	up.	 paper	consumption	
	 	 	 	 	 	 in	buildings	and		
	 	 	 	 	 	 workplaces	2018.	
	S6	 Undertake	a		 HOS	 	 	 A	comprehensive	 20%	 30%	 40%	
	 	 comprehensive		 P&T	 	 	 understanding	of	what	
	 	 ‘consumables’	review		 	 	 	 we	consume	in	the	
	 	 through	buildings		 	 	 	 workplace	ie	plastic	
	 	 and	workplaces	–		 	 	 	 cups, 	cleaning	products	
	 	 repeat	annually	 	 	 	 and	supplies	will	allow	
	 	 	 	 	 	 us	to	identify		
	 	 	 	 	 	 opportunities	to	reduce. 	
	 	 	 	 	 	 Measure; 	baseline			
	 	 	 	 	 	 consumption	in		
	 	 	 	 	 	 buildings	and		
	 	 	 	 	 	 workplaces	2018.	S1	 Embed	 ‘green		 HOS	P&E	 In	line	with	production	 Officer	time.	 Encourage	
	 	 technologies	and		 	 of	sustainable	 	 sustainability	through	
	 	 low	carbon	materials’		 	 procurement	policy	 	 supply	chain. 	
	 	 as	part	of	tender		 	 Mar	2019. 	
	 	 process	for	any	new		
	 	 construction.	 	 	 	
	S2	 Maintain	regular		 HOS	P&E	 	Mar	2019.	 Officer	time.	 Will	provide	 5%	 15%	 30%	
	 	 review	and	scrutiny	 	 	 	 information	on	our	
	 	 of	energy		 	 	 	 built	estate	including	
	 	 consumption	in		 	 	 	 where	efficiency	
	 	 buildings	and		 	 	 	 improvements	may	
	 	 workplaces.	 	 	 	 be	made	–	costs	and		
	 	 	 	 	 	 carbon	savings. 	
	 	 	 	 	 	 Measure; 	baseline		
	 	 	 	 	 	 energy	consumption		
	 	 	 	 	 	 existing	buildings	2018.	
	S3	 Introduce	 ‘voltage		 HOS	P&E	 Sept	2019.	 Officer	time	 Reduction	on	 	 	 	
	 	 optimisation’	type		 	 	 and	£000	–			 voltage	to	electrical	
	 	 technology	in	all		 	 	 equipment	and	 appliances	and	systems. 	
	 	 buildings	and		 	 	 set	up.	 	
	 	 workplaces	 	 	 	 	
	 	 where	appropriate		 	 	 	 	
	 	 to	do	so.	 	 	 	 	 	Action Plan18Action Plan continued
 Ref Activity Lead Timescale  Resources Cost/benefit CO2 reduction target
       2020 2025  2030 
	S9	 Lighting	controls	in		 HOS	 Sept	2019	 Officer	time	 Reduction	on	energy	 5%	 10%	 15%	
	 	 all	buildings	and		 P&E	 	 and	£000	–		 consumption	
	 	 workplaces	(where		 	 	 equipment	and	 Measure; 	baseline	
	 	 appropriate).	 	 	 set	up.	 energy	consumption	 	 	
	 	 	 	 	 	 existing	lighting	in		
	 	 	 	 	 	 buildings	and		
	 	 	 	 	 	 workplaces	at	the	point		
	 	 	 	 	 	 of	installation.	
	S10	 	Rationalisation	of		 HOS	 Mar	2019	 Officer	time	 Reduction	on	vehicular	 	
	 	 office	floor	space	for		 P&E	 	 and	£000	–		 travel	by	staff	and	
	 	 ourselves	–		 	 	 equipment	and	 reduction	on	floor	/	
	 	 collaboration	via		 	 	 set	up.	 office	space	required. 	
	 	 sharing	resources		 	 	 	 	
	 	 with	others.	 	 	 	 		S8	 Install	electrical		 HOS	P&E	 	March	2020	 Officer	time	 Reduction	on	diesel	/		 	 	 	
	 	 vehicle 	charging 	points 		 	 	 and	£000	–		 petrol	fuel	consumption	
	 	 for	staff	and	visitors		 	 	 equipment	and	 by	staff	and	visitors. 	
	 	 throughout	buildings		 	 	 set	up.	 	
	 	 and	workplaces.	 	 	 	 		S7	 Review	office/	 HOS	SS	 	Sept	2019	 Officer	time	 Embedding	of	climate	 10%	 30%	 60%	
	 	 workplace	recycling		 	 	 and	£000	–	 change	consideration	
	 	 methods	-	make	it	far		 	 	 equipment	and	 across	the	organisation	
	 	 more	visual	using		 	 	 set	up.	 and	improvements	
	 	 colour	coded	bins	–		 	 	 	 in	recycling	rates. 	
	 	 promote	recycling		 	 	 	 Measure; 	residual	bin	
	 	 figures	at	these		 	 	 	 waste	in	workplaces	
	 	 locations	to	use	as	an	 	 	 	 2018. 	
	 	 indicator	of	progress		
	 	 and	to	act	as			 	 encouragement.	 		 	19
Theme two:
Renewable Energy20Theme 2 - Renewable Energy
Over the last 200 years or so an ever-
increasing proportion of our energy has come from non-renewable energy sources such as coal, gas and oil.  As the demand for energy rises these resources are not only unsustainable in terms of reserves, but they are also unsustainable for the environment as they produce harmful gases that are responsible for the negative effects that climate change is 
having upon our planet.
Renewable energy are sources of power 
that quickly replenish themselves and can 
be used again and again, power from the 
sun, air and ground are all potentially 
infinite sources of power.  Biomass technology which produces energy from wood can be sustainable if replanting of the wood supply is managed effectively.  Combined heat and power (CHP) and similar technologies such as heat recovery systems reduce energy consumption making better, more efficient use of non-renewable energy sources.
The opportunities and application of 
renewable energy and energy efficient technologies will be wide and varied across our organisational reach.  There is the potential for significant carbon reduction throughout our communities via this Thematic Area; in our own 
buildings and workplaces, in our housing 
stock, through the planning process 
and through community education and promotion.
21
Progress to date
• Photovoltaic cells installed at the Arc.
• Photovoltaic cells installed at the 
Tangent.
• Photovoltaic cells installed at two Sheltered Housing Schemes.
• Photovoltaic cells on some social housing stock.
• Wind powered turbine installed at The Tangent.
• Ground Source Heat Pump (GSHP) installed at Pleasley Vale Outdoor Activity Centre.
• Explored use of alternative energy 
sources.Case Study
The Arc Refurbishment
During refurbishment works in 
readiness for the relocation of the BDC headquarters from Sherwood Lodge to the Arc, a roof mounted PV (Photovoltaic) panel array was installed producing 50Kw which equates to 173,548kWh of renewable energy and approximately £20k in government feed-in tariffs. Most recently a replacement lighting scheme has been developed to replace the existing fluorescent tube light fittings with energy efficient LED lighting. This change will result in energy savings in the region of 60% and a reduction in annual carbon emissions of 38 tonne.22 Ref Activity Lead Timescale  Resources Cost/benefit CO2 reduction target
       2020 2025  2030 
R3	 Develop	business	 HOS	P&E	 Sept	2019	 Officer	time	 Electricity	produced	by	 5%	 5%	 5%	
	 	 case	for	small	scale	 	 	 and	£000	–		 wind	turbines	is	clean	
	 	 wind	turbine	 	 	 equipment	and	 and	does	not	release	
	 	 technology	at	 Arc	and	 	 	 set	up.	 any	harmful	gases	
	 	 work	with	solar	PV	 	 	 	 and	generates	cost	
	 	 systems	and	battery	 	 	 	 and	carbon	savings. 	
	 	 technology.	 	 	 	 Measure; 	baseline		
	 	 	 	 	 	 energy	consumption		
	 	 	 	 	 	 at	point	of	installation.	
R4	 Develop	business	 HOS	P&E	 March	2020	 Officer	time	 Electricity	produced	by	 20%	 20%	 20%	
	 	 case	for	ground	 	 	 and	£000	–	 ground	source	heat	
	 	 source	heat	pump	 	 	 equipment	and	 pumps	is	clean	and	
	 	 at	the	 Arc	 	 	 set	up.	 does	not	release	any	
	 	 –	possibility	to	install	 	 	 	 harmful	gases	and	
	 	 either	in	surrounding	 	 	 	 generates	cost	and	
	 	 open	space	or	 	 	 	 carbon	savings. 		
	 	 beneath	new	3G	 	 	 	 Measure; 	baseline		
	 	 sports	pitch.	 	 	 	 energy	consumption		
	 	 	 	 	 	 at	point	of	installation.	
R5	 Develop	a	 ‘Rainwater		 HOS	 Sept	2019	 Officer	time	 Opportunities	to	use	 10%	 20%	 30%	
	 	 Harvesting	and	 Water		 P&E	/	 	 and	£000	–		 rain	water	and	waste	
	 	 Reuse/Conservation’		 HOS	 	 equipment	and	 water	for	a	variety	of	
	 	 feasibility	plan	 SS	 	 set	up.	 applications	including	
	 	 for	all	buildings	and	 	 	 	 but	not	limited	to; 	
	 	 workplaces.	 	 	 	 toilet	flushing, 	vehicle		
	 	 	 	 	 	 washing	and	watering		
	 	 	 	 	 	 plants. 		Measure; 		
	 	 	 	 	 	 baseline	existing	water		
	 	 	 	 	 	 consumption	at		
	 	 	 	 	 	 point	of	installation.	R1	 Undertake 	Photovoltaic 		 HOS	P&E	 Sept	2019	 Officer	time	 Electricity	produced	by	 10%	 20%	 50%	
	 	 feasibility	study	and		 	 	 and	£000	–	 solar	cells	is	clean, 	
	 	 install	on	all		 	 	 equipment	and	 silent. 	does	not	release	
	 	 appropriate	council		 	 	 set	up.	 any	harmful	gases	
	 	 buildings	and		 	 	 	 and	generates	cost	
	 	 workplaces.	 	 	 	 and	carbon	savings	
	 	 	 	 	 	 Measure; 	baseline		
	 	 	 	 	 	 energy	consumption		
	 	 	 	 	 	 at	point	of	installation.	
R2	 Develop	business		 HOS	P&E	 Sept	2019	 Officer	time	 This	technology	uses	 20%	 20%	 20%	
	 	 case	for	CHP	 	 	 and	£000	–		 gas	to	produce	
	 	 (combined	heat	 	 	 equipment	and	 electricity	more	
	 	 and	power)		 	 	 set	up.	 efficiently	on	site. 	
	 	 system	at	the	 Arc	 	 	 	 Measure; 	baseline		
	 	 (including	leisure	 	 	 	 energy	consumption		
	 	 facility).	 	 	 	 at	point	of	installation.	Action Plan23
Theme three:
Low Carbon Fleet24Theme 3 - Low Carbon Fleet
Fleet emissions arise from our staff 
using their own cars for business travel (grey fleet) and the operation of our own fleet to deliver services such as waste collection, grounds maintenance and outreach programmes amongst others.  Clearly our fleet is an integral part of our operations, however by reducing the need to travel and reducing carbon omitting fuel consumption, our 
fleet management has the potential 
to contribute significantly towards our overall carbon reduction ambition.
New technology can transform the way 
we work and where we work reducing the need for staff to travel.  Home working, remote working, virtual presence all have the capability to reduce the need for work related travel.  Advances in low emissions vehicle technology, route optimisation and journey rationalisation present opportunities to reduce our service delivery related fuel consumption and the impact of our fleet upon the environment.Progress to date
• All new vehicle purchases meet the most up to date emissions standards – currently Euro VI.
• Refuse collection vehicles now have electric bin hoists which reduce fuel consumption, increasing mpg from 3 to 4.5mpg.
• Vehicles have exhaust\engine management system particulate filters to reduce CO2\NOX emissions.
• Grounds maintenance journey rationalisation and route optimisation.
• Waste collection journey rationalisation and route optimisation.
• Introduced seasonal green bin collections which created capacity and additional resources which have been used on environmental programmes. 
• Increased size/capacity of some waste vehicles to reduce trip frequency.
25
• Introduced a joint skip cleansing service 
reducing the need for vehicles across three local authorities.
• Introduced a joint bulky refuse service reducing the need for vehicles across three local authorities.
• Introduced a joint clinical waste service reducing the need for vehicles across three local authorities.
• Introduced mobile working resulting in reduced journey’s and route optimisation.Case Study
Vehicle purchases
All new vehicle purchases meet the 
most up to date emission standards (currently Euro-VI) and our refuse 
collection vehicles now have electric 
operated bin hoists which further 
reduce fuel consumption and vehicle 
emissions.   All of our Large Goods 
Vehicles (LGV) have exhaust\engine 
management system particulate filters 
to further reduce CO2\NOX emissions 
and drivers undergo annual training 
which includes environmentally 
beneficial driving techniques.26 Ref Activity Lead Timescale  Resources Cost/benefit CO2 reduction target
       2020 2025  2030 
F3	 Introduce	ULEV	/		 HOS	 Ongoing	 Officer	time	 Reduction	on	diesel	/		 10%	 25%	 75%	
	 	 electric	large	fleet		 SS	 	 and	£000	–	 petrol	fuel	consumption. 	
	 	 vehicles	upon	renewal		 	 	 equipment	and	 Measure; 	baseline	fuel	
	 	 or	when	technology		 	 	 support	set	up.	 consumption	and	carbon	
	 	 vs	operational		 	 	 	 footprint	of	fleet	at	
	 	 consideration	balance		 	 	 	 point	of	introduction. 	
	 	 is	appropriate	to	do		
	 	 so	–	consideration	in			 	 conjunction	with	F5			 	 below	will	take	place			 	 ie	size	of	payload	vs			 	 journey	and	route			 	 optimisation.	
F4	 Introduce	battery		 HOS	 Ongoing	 Officer	time	 Reduction	on	diesel	/		 10%	 50%	 100%	
	 	 powered	hand	tools		 SS	 	 and	£000	–		 petrol	fuel	consumption. 	
	 	 ie	trimmers, 	strimmers, 		 	 	 equipment	and	 Measure; 	baseline	fuel	
	 	 mowers	upon	renewal		 	 	 support	set	up.	 consumption	and	carbon	
	 	 or	when	technology		 	 	 	 footprint	of	tools	at	
	 	 vs	operational		 	 	 	 point	of	introduction. 	
	 	 consideration	balance			 	 is	appropriate	to			 	 do	so.	 		 	 	 	
	
F5	 Continue	to	undertake		 HOS	 Ongoing	 Officer	time	 	 	 	 	
	 	 waste	collection	and		 SS	 	 	 	
	 	 grounds	maintenance		 	 	 	 	
	 	 route	rationalisation			 	 and	optimisation	
	 	 	 			F1	 Review	the	options			 HOS	 Sept	2019	 Officer	time	 Reduction	on	diesel	/		 5%	 10%	 30%	
	 	 for	pool	car	facility	 SS	 	 and	£000	–	 petrol	fuel	consumption	
	 	 including	super	low	 	 	 equipment	and	 by	staff	for	work	related	
	 	 emission	options.	 	 	 set	up.	 travel. 	Measure; 	miles		
	 	 	 	 	 	 for	which	utilised	-	KWh		
	 	 	 	 	 	 charging	provided	for		
	 	 	 	 	 	 vehicles	vs	existing		
	 	 	 	 	 	 mileage	claims.	
F2	 Introduce	ULEV	/		 HOS	 Ongoing	 Officer	time	 Reduction	on	diesel	/	 10%	 50%	 100%	
	 	 electric	smaller	and		 SS	 	 and	£000	–		 petrol	fuel	consumption. 	
	 	 medium	fleet	vehicles		 	 	 equipment	and	 Measure; 	baseline	fuel	
	 	 upon	renewal	or	when		 	 	 support	set	up.	 consumption	and	
	 	 technology	vs		 	 	 	 carbon	footprint	
	 	 operational		 	 	 	 of	fleet	2018. 	
	 	 consideration	balance		
	 	 is	appropriate	to	do	so.	 	 	 	Action Plan27
Theme four:
Transport28Theme 4 - Transport
With climate change gas emissions from 
transport representing around 20% of total UK domestic emissions, transport must be part of the carbon reduction solution.  Low carbon transport solutions also present huge opportunities; not just for climate change but for our communities’ health and the wider environment.  Transport underpins the quality of life and economic prospects 
of our communities too, the balance 
between low carbon transport and economic prosperity has to be achieved. 
Local authorities can encourage and 
support staff to travel to work and during work in a more sustainable manner.  The use of pool vehicles, bicycle racks, showering facilities, car sharing and encouraging smarter choices through travel plans, can all have an impact.
Local authorities can influence the 
development of better public transport, cycling routes and promoting low carbon vehicles by installing electric charging points at its own premises and sustainable development through the development planning process.
Progress to date
• Shared pool car established between BDC and NEDDC.
• Travel plan in place for the Arc including many measures, targets and 
actions which support sustainable 
travel.
• Travel plan in place for Riverside Depot.
• Member of the Countywide Sustainable Travel Group.
• Lunchtime health walks established at the Arc and Riverside Depot.
• Bicycle lockers installed at the Arc.
• Introduced salary sacrifice cycle purchase scheme.
• Reduced Hackney Carriage rate for vehicles under 150 CO2mg/Km.
• Increased use and development of ICT.
29
 Ref Activity Lead Timescale  Resources Cost/benefit CO2 reduction target
       2020 2025  2030 
T3	 Explore	the	potential		 HOS	 Mar	2019	 Officer	time	 Reduction	on	vehicular	 	
	 	 to	introduce	a		 P&T	 	 and	£000	–		 travel	by	staff	and	
	 	 “Transport	Behaviour		 	 	 equipment	/		 visitors	to	the	 Arc.	
	 	 Change” 	technology			 	 	 software	and	 	
	 	 that	delivers		 	 	 set	up.	 	
	 	 evidence-driven		 	 	 	 	
	 	 modal	shift	for		 	 	 	 	
	 	 reducing	emissions.	 	
T4	 Introduce	electric	bike		 HOS	 Sept	2019	 Officer	time	 Reduction	on	diesel	/		 	 	 	 	
	 	 scheme	for	staff.	 P&T	 	 and	£000	–	 petrol	fuel	consumption	
	 	 	 	 	 equipment	and		 by	staff	for	their	travel	
	 	 	 	 	 set	up.	 to	work. 		
	 	 	 	 	 	 	
T6	 Further	expand	the		 HOS	 Sept	2019	 Officer	time	 Reduction	on	diesel	/		 10%	 25%	 50%	
	 	 reduced	Hackney		 SS	 	 	 petrol	fuel	consumption	
	 	 Carriage	rate	across		 	 	 	 by	taxi’s. 	Measure; 		
	 	 district	with	further		 	 	 	 baseline	energy		
	 	 more	energy	efficient		 	 	 	 reduced	prices	for	
	 	 vehicles	or	exemptions			 	 	 efficient	taxi	rates	2018. 	
	 	 for	electric	vehicles. 	
	 	 .	 	 	 			T1	 Introduce	an	electric		 HOS	 Sept	2019	 Officer	time	 Reduction	on	diesel	/		 5%	 20%	 30%	
	 	 vehicle	or	ULEV		 F ,R&R	 	 and	£000	–		 petrol	fuel	consumption	
	 	 leasing	scheme	for		 	 	 equipment	and	 by	staff	for	all	their	
	 	 staff	–	could	be		 	 	 set	up.	 travel. 	Measure; 	electric	 	 	
	 	 conjunction	with	S8	–		 	 	 	 promoted	in		/ulev	travel	
	 	 free	charging	for	staff.	 	 	 		 vs		existing	mileage		
	 	 	 	 	 	 claims.	
T2	 Further	develop, 		 HOS	 Mar	2019	 Officer	time	 Reduction	on	vehicular	 	
	 	 widen	and	embed	 Arc		 P&T	 	 	 travel	by	staff	and	
	 	 Travel	Plan. 		 	 	 	 visitors	to	the	 Arc.	
	 	 	 	 	 	 	Action Plan
T5	 Expand	and	promote		 HOS	 Sept	2019	 Officer	time	 Reduction	on	vehicular	
	 	 walking	/cycling		 P&T	 	 and	£000	–		 travel	by	staff, 	visitors	
	 	 infrastructure	and		 	 	 equipment	and	 and	wider	community. 	
	 	 promotion	including		 	 	 set	up. 	
	 	 walking	and	cycling		
	 	 maps	–	district	wide.	 	 	30 Ref Activity Lead Timescale  Resources Cost/benefit CO2 reduction target
       2020 2025  2030 
T9	 Re-introduce	the		 HOS	 Mar	2019	 Officer	time	 Reduction	on	vehicular	 5%	 10%	 15%	 	
	 	 concept	and	uptake		 P&T	 	 	 travel	by	staff, 	
	 	 of	 ‘share	a	lift’		 /	Comms	 	 	 Measure; 	HR21	mileage	
	 	 scheme.	 Team.	 	 	 claim	car	share	
	 	 	 	 	 	 identification.	 	 	 		
T10	 Work	with	DCC,	 HOS	 Ongoing	 Officer	time	 Increased	usage	of	
	 	 community	transport	 P&T	 	 	 public	transport	–	
	 	 and	private	operators		 	 	 	 reduced	car	usage	–		
	 	 to	make	the	case	for		 	 	 	 reduced	carbon	
	 	 improved	public		 	 	 	 emissions. 	
	 	 transport	within	the		 	 	 	 	
	 	 district.	 	T7	 Re-introduce	the		 SAMT	/	 Mar	2019	 Officer	time	 Reduction	on	vehicular	 10%	 25%		 50%	
	 	 concept	and	uptake		 HOS	 	 and	£000	–	 travel	by	staff	and	
	 	 of	 ‘virtual	meetings’	–	 P&T	 	 equipment	and	 visitors	Measure; 		
	 	 review	all	meetings		 	 	 set	up.	 baseline	2018	mileage	
	 	 and	opportunities.	 	 	 	 claims. 		
T8	 Undertake	Council		 SAMT	 Sept	2019	 Officer	time	 Reduction	on	vehicular	 	
	 	 wide	home	working		 	 	 and	£000	–	 travel	by	staff	and	
	 	 options.	 	 		 equipment	and		 reduction	on	floor	/		
	 	 	 	 	 set	up.	 office	space	required. 	
	 	 	 	 	 	Action Plan
Case Study
The Arc Travel Plan, Traffic 
Count and Staff Travel Survey
As part of the development of the enhanced leisure facility (now known as Go! Active @ The Arc), a travel plan for The Arc was produced in 2016. This aims to reduce the number of single occupancy vehicles entering and leaving The Arc through the promotion of active and sustainable travel, such as walking, cycling and public transport.
A staff travel survey was carried out in 
October 2017 with a total of 139 responses from Bolsover District Council, Derbyshire County Council and North East Derbyshire District Council Staff. Although the survey did largely confirm that most employees (86% of respondents) drive to work as they need access to a car for their job (80% of respondents), over half of respondents would consider travelling to work by an alternative mode.
Of those who would consider an 
alternative, car sharing was the most popular option (30%), followed by cycling (18%) and bus (17%). This does suggest that there is potential in exploring how the use of these options can be encouraged through the development of a car sharing scheme and the promotion of cycling to work and the use of public transport.31
Theme five:
Planning32Theme 5 - Planning
Local authority planning functions are 
a key lever in reducing emissions and tackling the effects of climate change.  The planning process can make a major contribution by shaping new and existing developments in ways that reduce carbon emissions.  The planning process has the potential to deliver the right development in the right place which can be informed by the ambition for sustainable development.
Energy efficient homes and businesses, 
effective public transport networks, sustainable drainage schemes, green infrastructure, sustainable travel infrastructure, are some of the outcomes that the planning process can bring to our communities.   Through such outcomes, the planning process has the potential to make a significant contribution to both mitigating and adapting to climate change through effective decision making on the location, scale, mix and character of development.
As a local authority we have a 
responsibility to help to achieve the UK’s emissions reduction targets, both through the direct influence described elsewhere in this plan and by bringing others together and encouraging local action.  The planning process can give local communities opportunities to take action on climate change by encouraging community based development and active participation in plan making.Effective Local Plans can both help to deliver a range of solutions to climate change issues and help local communities to reap the economic, environmental and social benefits of such action over the long term.
Progress to date
• Sustainability statements required from developers.
• Renewable and low carbon energy strategy encourages overall use of low carbon technology and renewables.
• Directing new development to settlements with a larger range of services and facilities.
33
Case Study
College Mews, Rectory 
Road, Clowne 
The site was formerly a further education campus (Chesterfield College) which became redundant.  Once cleared of the previous buildings it remained vacant for a number of years.  This site is situated within the town centre of Clowne and is well located to shops and local amenities.  
The Planning Team negotiated with 
the developer to design a high density development (48 dwellings per hectare) of this brownfield land, suited to a central location, with permission granted for 81 houses and flats in 2012.  This included the introduction of footpath links to make it easy to walk into the town centre, which helps support the viability and vitality of the local shops.  The layout was arranged with windows to overlook these connections to make them feel safe to use.  
Discussions also resulted in the alteration 
of standard house types to reference the local character of Clowne through the use of locally relevant materials and architectural details, to help the development feel more rooted in the village, as well as help it relate better to the Clowne Conservation Area which boarders Rectory Road.  
The scheme is clustered around a focal 
square and the development also included the retention of the former Mining Technical Institute (a building of local historic interest), which was converted into flats by Action Housing.  
The development represents the 
sustainable redevelopment of a brownfield site with a design that is sympathetic to its local context and which supports the town centre.  • Incorporating policies in the Local Plan 
to provide improved bus and train 
facilities in new developments and 
safer environments for walking and 
cycling.
• Requiring developers to submit flood 
risk assessments, ecology reports, and sustainable drainage proposals 
and landscaping schemes where 
appropriate. • Incorporating policies in the Local Plan that protect and enhance the district’s 
trees and natural environment.34PL3	 In	line	with	legislation		 HOS	 Ongoing	 Officer	time	 For	the	Council, 	such	 25%	 30%	 50%	
	 	 and	as	and	when		 Planning	 	 	 a	statement	will	support	
	 	 legislation	allows; 		 	 	 	 the	existing	information	
	 	 Planning	applications		 	 	 	 for	consideration	of	a	
	 	 for	major	new		 	 	 	 range	of	issues	when	
	 	 developments	to	be		 	 	 	 considering	planning	
	 	 supported	by	a		 	 	 	 applications	and	
	 	 sustainability		 	 	 	 assessing	the	
	 	 statement	that	has		 	 	 	 sustainability	of	a	
	 	 regard	to	the	Councils		 	 	 	 planning	application	
	 	 Carbon	Reduction		 	 	 	 Measure; 	comparison	
	 	 Plan	and	ambition.	 	 	 	 with	carbon	footprint	of	
	 	 	 	 	 	 a	similar	previous		
	 	 	 	 	 	 development	without		
	 	 	 	 	 	 such	a	statement	 Ref Activity Lead Timescale  Resources Cost/benefit CO2 reduction target
       2020 2025  2030 
PL1	 In	line	with	legislation		 HOS	 Ongoing	 Officer	time	 As 	an	indicative 	example	 25%	 30%	 50%	
	 	 and	as	and	when		 Planning	 	 	 an	average	3	bedroom	
	 	 legislation	allows; 		 	 	 	 semi-detached	house	
	 	 establish	requirement		 	 	 	 uses	3500	KWh	of	
	 	 for	all	new	domestic		 	 	 	 electricity	and	
	 	 development	to		 	 	 	 12,000	Kwh	gas. 	
	 	 achieve	high	%		 	 	 	 A	25%	reduction	on	this	
	 	 carbon	reduction		 	 	 	 would	equate	to	a	
	 	 incorporating	a		 	 	 	 saving	of	around	 	 	
	 	 minimum	%	of		 	 	 	 1.3	tonnes	of	C02	
	 	 renewable	energy		 	 	 	 emissions	per	year. 	
	 	 generation.	 	 	 	 Measure; 	baseline		
	 	 	 	 	 	 properties	built	in	2018.	
PL2	 In	line	with	legislation		 HOS	 Ongoing		 Officer	time	 Increased	security	of	 	 10%	 20%	
	 	 and	as	and	when		 Planning	 	 	 supply, 	carbon	reduction	
	 	 legislation	allows; 	On		 	 	 	 and	reduced	costs	for	
	 	 all	large	development		 	 	 	 residents. 	Measure; 		
	 	 sites, 	require		 	 	 	 comparison	with	
	 	 developers	to		 	 	 	 carbon	footprint	of	
	 	 undertake	feasibility		 	 	 	 a	similar	previous	
	 	 assessment	for		 	 	 	 development	without	
	 	 community	heating.	 	 	 	 such	a	scheme.	 	Action Plan35
 Ref Activity Lead Timescale  Resources Cost/benefit CO2 reduction target
       2020 2025  2030 
PL6	 In	line	with	legislation		 HOS	 Ongoing	 Officer	time	 This	will	provide	a	
	 	 and	as	and	when		 Planning	 	 	 mechanism	for	
	 	 legislation	allows; 	For		 	 	 	 monitoring	actual	 	 	
	 	 major	new		 	 	 	 carbon	and	financial	
	 	 developments, 	require		 	 	 	 savings	on	a	new	
	 	 on	site	monitoring		 	 	 	 development. 	
	 	 capability	for	low	and		
	 	 zero	carbon	uptake		 	 from	residents.	 	 	 	 	 	PL4	 In	line	with	legislation		 HOS	 Ongoing	 Officer	time	 For	the	Council, 		 	
	 	 and	as	and	when		 Planning	 	 	 such	information	will	
	 	 legislation	allows; 		 	 	 	 support	the	existing	
	 	 Ensure	new		 	 	 	 information	for	
	 	 development	is		 	 	 	 consideration	of	a	
	 	 resilient	to	the	likely		 	 	 	 range	of	issues	when	
	 	 changes	in	weather		 	 	 	 considering	planning	
	 	 impact. 		For	example	-	 	 	 	 applications	and	
	 	 includes	features	to		 	 	 	 assessing	the	
	 	 deal	with	higher		 	 	 	 sustainability	of	a	
	 	 temperatures, 		 	 	 	 planning	application. 	
	 	 including	green			 	 spaces, 	shading	and		
	 	 water	management.	 	
PL5	 In	line	with	legislation	 HOS		 Ongoing	 Officer	time	 This	will	provide	clear	 25%	 30%	 50%	
	 	 and	as	and	when		 Planning	 	 	 guidance	for	planners	
	 	 legislation	allows; 		 	 	 	 and	will	contribute	to	
	 	 Develop	specific		 	 	 	 both	National	and	
	 	 planning	protocols	for		 	 	 	 Council	targets	of	
	 	 small	scale		 	 	 	 sourcing	energy	from	
	 	 technologies	not		 	 	 	 renewables. 	
	 	 classed	as	permitted		 	 	 	 Measure; 	Baseline	
	 	 development	to		 	 	 	 number	of	residential	
	 	 support	retro	fitting.	 	 	 	 properties	with	retro		
	 	 	 	 	 	 fitted	renewable	energy		
	 	 	 	 	 	 technology	as	of	2018. 		Action Plan
PL7		 Require	development		 HOS	 Ongoing	 Officer	time	 Maintaining	biodiversity	
	 proposals	to	protect		 Planning	 	 	 and	ensuring	that	
	 and	enhance	the		 	 	 	 opportunities	for	carbon	
	 natural	environment.	 	 	 	 sequestration	are	
	 	 	 	 	 maximised.
PL8		 Support	proposals	for		 HOS	 Ongoing	 Officer	time	 Reducing	the	need	for	
	 renewable	and	low		 Planning	 	 	 fossil	fuel	based	energy. 	
	 carbon	energy			 generation	where			 these	do	not	cause			 adverse	effects.
		 	36 Ref Activity Lead Timescale  Resources Cost/benefit CO2 reduction target
       2020 2025  2030 
P10		 Development		 HOS	 Ongoing	 Officer	time	 Reduce	the	number	of		
	 proposals	for	 Planning	 	 	 cars	being	used	for	
	 companies	with	a		 	 	 	 commuting. 	
	 large	number	of		
	 employees	shall	be			 required	to	prepare			 Travel	Plans	for	the			 sustainable			 transportation	of	staff			 to	and	from	work.	 	PL9		 Support	the	provision		 HOS	 Ongoing	 Officer	time	 Reducing	the	need	for	
	 of	new	transport		 Planning	 	 	 people	to	travel	by	petrol	
	 infrastructure	that		 	 	 	 and	diesel	cars. 	
	 makes	safe	provision			 for	pedestrians, 		
	 cyclists	and	public			 transport	users. 		 	
	
P10		 Through	the	careful		 HOS	 Ongoing	 Officer	time	 Reduce	the	need	for		
	 siting	and	design	of	 Planning	 	 	 people	to	travel	by	petrol	
	 new	development	 	 	 	 and	diesel	cars. 	
	 maximise	the			 opportunities	for			 walking, 	cycling	and		
	 public	transport			 movement. 		 	Action Plan37
Theme six:
Community and 
Collaboration38Theme 6 - Community 
and Collaboration
As community leaders, local authorities have great potential to influence change in our district.  By raising awareness and embedding ideas about the potential to reduce emissions, and by working collaboratively with others to reduce emissions, our organisation has significant reach and potential impact in developing a local response to climate change.
Many in our communities will find 
messages around climate change confusing or think it’s a problem for the future.  They will find it difficult to see how it relates 
to them personally, or realise that such 
a big problem really can be affected by 
individual actions.
Awareness, initiatives and projects that are 
interwoven through educational, social, cultural and economic arenas have the potential to be more effective than ‘top down’ solutions alone.  Such an approach enables individuals, groups, families, business and organisations to recognise their own role in contributing to a more sustainable future and encourages people of all ages to engage more fully in carbon reduction and sustainable living. Working with our community partners the local authority can engage with the local and wider communities to help them understand climate change, how it impacts upon them directly and how they can make a difference.  Our organisation, in partnership with schools, Parish Council’s, local environmental groups, energy advice centres, voluntary sector, businesses and other stakeholders have a great 
opportunity to work collaboratively to 
promote carbon reduction.  
Progress to date
• Promoted advice provision for ‘fuel poor’ across district via council ‘In touch’ publication.
• Energy Saving to save MONEY - message is delivered face-to-face alongside fuel poverty visits.
• Gas connections and funded boiler installations for thousands of of fuel poor homes on solid fuel across the district.
• Thousands of loft insulation, cavity wall insulation and external wall insulation referrals to local Trusted Traders.
• Consultation undertaken with local businesses to invest in technologies such as heat pumps, photovoltaic cells and heat recovery systems.
• The Council collaborates through the Local Authority Energy Partnership Warm Homes Scheme.  
39
• The Council collaborates 
with the private sector – resulting in hundreds of funded gas connections for both private housing and Council  owned properties.
• The Council collaborates with the voluntary sector to identify and source one off grants for vulnerable people in  fuel poverty.
 Ref Activity Lead Timescale  Resources Cost/benefit CO2 reduction target
       2020 2025  2030 
C3	 Develop	specific		 Comms	 March	2019	 Officer	time	 Wider	awareness	and	
	 	 campaigns	to	run		 Team	 	 	 uptake	from	
	 	 through	social	media, 		 	 	 	 community	–	behaviour	
	 	 Council	website	and		 	 	 	 change. 	
	 	 publications	that			 	 focus	not	only	on			 	 Carbon	Reduction	but			 	 saving	money.	 	 	C1	 Develop	a	Climate		 Comms	 March	2019	 Officer	time	 An	effective	
	 	 Change		 Team	 	 	 communication	
	 	 Communication		 	 	 	 strategy	will	support	
	 	 Strategy	to	include	all		 	 	 	 behavioural	change	in	
	 	 below 	actions.	 	 	 	 the	workplace 	and	wider	
	 	 	 	 	 	 community	bringing		
	 	 	 	 	 	 with	it	carbon	and		
	 	 	 	 	 	 financial	savings.
C2	 Use	social	media, 		 Comms, 		 March	2019	 Officer	time	 Wider	awareness	and	
	 	 Council	website, 		 Team	 	 	 uptake	from	community	
	 	 Bolsover	 T.V	and		 	 	 	 –	behaviour	change. 	
	 	 publications 	to	promote	 	
	 	 access	to	the	Home			 	 Improvement	 Team.	 	Action Plan
C4	 Work	with	providers	/		 Comms		 March	2019	 Officer	time	 Wider	awareness	and	
	 	 suppliers	to	develop		 Team	 	 	 uptake	from	community	
	 	 and	promote	a		 	 	 	 –	behaviour	change. 	
	 	 register	for	access	to			 	 schemes	to	reduce			 	 residential	property			 	 Carbon	Footprint	and			 	 save	money.	 	
	 	 	Case Study
Tackling Fuel Poverty and Improving Tenant Comfort at New Bolsover Model Village
New Bolsover is one of the most socially deprived areas of the UK. Sub-regional fuel poverty data shows that New Bolsover is significantly worse than the East Midlands. The current rate of properties in fuel poverty is 29.8% the East Midlands average is 18.4%.
The environmental improvement work undertaken by 
BDC’s investment has changed properties from an EPC rating of D to C. a significant achievement on Grade II 
Listed properties.40 Ref Activity Lead Timescale  Resources Cost/benefit CO2 reduction target
       2020 2025  2030 
C7	 Develop	an		 Comms	 Oct	2019	 Officer	time	 Wider	awareness	and	
	 	 information	package		 Team	/	SS	 	 and	cost	of	 uptake	from	children	
	 	 and	presentation/		 recycling	 	 production	of	 –	behaviour	change. 	
	 	 video	to	be	delivered		 Team	/	 	 video. 	
	 	 through	schools	 	Leisure	
	 	 	 5:60	 Team	C5	 Provide	a	series	of		 Comms	 Sept	2019	 Officer	time	 Wider	awareness	and	
	 	 training	sessions	on		 Team	 	 	 ability	to	 ‘share	the	
	 	 communicating		 	 	 	 message’	through	a	
	 	 climate	change	for		 	 	 	 range	of	networks	
	 	 staff. 	Elected		 	 	 	 –	behaviours	change. 	
	 	 Members, 	Parish		
	 	 Councils	and	partners.	 	 	
C6	 Provide	a	series	of		 Comms	 Sept	2019	 Officer	time	 Wider	awareness	and	
	 	 community 	information 		 Team	 	 	 uptake	from	community	
	 	 sessions	around	the		 	 	 	 –	behaviour	change. 	
	 	 District	on	climate		
	 	 change	including	 ‘the		
	 	 need	for	change’	and			 	 ‘benefits	of	change’			 	 along	with	access	to			 	 suppliers 	and	schemes.	 	 	Action Plan
C8	 Continue	to	work		 HOS	 Ongoing	 Officer	time	 Development	of		
	 	 very	closely	with		 H&EH	 	 	 improved	standards	
	 	 LAEP	in	assisting		 	 	 	 and	opportunities	and	
	 	 with	national		 	 	 	 promotion	of	wider		
	 	 government	energy		 	 	 	 awareness	and	uptake. 	
	 	 consultations	and			 	 promoting	minimum			 	 standards	for	homes.	
C9	 Continue	to	build	 H&EH	 Ongoing	 Officer	time	 Funded	gas	connections	 10%	 20%	 30%	
	 	 relationships	with	 	 	 	 for	both	private	housing	
	 	 external	organisations	 	 	 	 and	Council	owned	
	 	 and	seek	funded	 	 	 	 Measure; 	baseline	 Warm	
	 	 schemes	via	 Warm	 	 	 	 Home	Scheme	to	2018	
	 	 Homes	Schemes.	 	 	
C10	 Work	with	external	 HOS	 Ongoing	 Officer	time	 Identification	of	 10%	 20%	 30%	
	 	 funding	bodies	with	a		 P&E	/	 	 	 opportunities 	and	funding	
	 	 focus	on	council		 HOS	 	 	 for	energy	efficiency	
	 	 commercial	buildings		 H&EH	 	 	 Measure; 	baseline	
	 	 and	stock.	 	 	 	 funding	secured		 	 	 	 	
	 	 	 	 	 	 initiatives	to	2018.	
C11	 Consider 	the	creation 			 HOS	 Sept	2019	 Officer	time	 Add	resilience	to	this	
	 	 of	an	environmental 		 H&EH	 	 and	apprentice	 area	of	work	and	share	
	 	 management 		 	 	 budget	 learning	with	young	
	 	 apprentice 	post	and		 	 	 	 people	who	may	go	
	 	 work	experience			 	 	 	 on	to	choose	this		
	 	 placement	 	 	 	 career	path. 	
	 	 programme.
C12	 Develop 		opportunities 		 HOS	 Ongoing	 Officer 	time	 Wider 	awareness 	and	
	 	 for 	collaboration 	with		 P&T	 	 	 ability 	to	share 	the	
	 	 the 	Bolsover 	Partnership 			 	 	 message 	through 	a	
	 	 in 	relation 	to	Carbon 		 	 	 	 range 	of	networks. 	
	 	 Reduction.41
Theme seven:
Biodiversity42Theme 7 - Biodiversity
Parks, open spaces and green spaces are 
valuable assets and are central to the lives of our communities.  They provide opportunities for leisure, play, relaxation and exercise but can also be influential in terms of community cohesion, physical and mental health and wellbeing, biodiversity, climate change mitigation and local economic growth – nice spaces = nice places to live and work.  
These spaces also support vital 
biodiversity, such as plants, habitats and threatened pollinators which are key to 
our food chain.  Parks provide children 
with a wonderful introduction to nature 
whilst playing and enjoying a safe space within their community.  Such spaces with even the most modest collection of trees, plants and shrubs offer the opportunity to learn about nature in many ways.  
Due to the effects of climate change, the 
future is likely to bring warmer winters, hotter and drier summers, more severe flooding and other extreme weather.  Because of the delayed effects of climate change gas emissions, a level of climate change is now likely to occur regardless of any emissions reductions that we may achieve now.  
Adaptation to climate change along with 
a sustainable environmental approach means making our green spaces, parks and open spaces more resilient.  Our green spaces form a natural infrastructure that is as critical to our community life as streets, drainage and sewers – and just like these, it is an infrastructure that requires investment and careful management if we are to meet the challenges of our changing climate.
Greenery that has turned brown loses its 
ability to provide environmental benefits like air cooling, at other times of the year flooding may be a major challenge – effective water management and drainage is one measure that supports a sustainable environment approach whilst adapting to the effects of climate change.  Planting regimes and the use of drought resistant planting that needs less watering is another measure along with the planting of large deciduous trees which have a particular value in cooling air and offering shade.
Bolsover District Council owns, manages 
and maintains approximately 197 hectares of green/open space, parks and recreation grounds within the district.  Effective planning and management of our green infrastructure can help the local authority to deliver a range of solutions to climate change issues, provide access to quality green spaces within our communities and support environmental and biodiversity benefits into the future. 
43
Progress to date
• A range of leisure related activities 
undertaken across the district utilising and promoting the spaces in the pursuit of health and wellbeing.
• Grass clippings left in situ in all areas except for fine turf sports facilities – this retains nitrogen levels, feeds soil organisms, recycles plant nutrients and 
contributes organic matter to the soil 
structure.
• Grass clippings left in situ also reduces 
transport and fuel usage related negative impact on the environment.
• Mechanical wood chipping machines are used to chip boughs/timber from tree pruning operations - this is subsequently used as a mulch on shrub beds which assists in controlling weed growth and avoids external buy-in and/or disposal related costs and impact.
• The Council operate a three bin system; Residual Waste (black), Recyclable Waste (burgundy) and Organic Waste (green).
• Households currently receive 74 wheeled bin collections per year achieving a combined recycling rate  of 41%.• Of our 41% recycling current recycling rate, 22% is derived from garden and food waste (green bin)’
Newton Playing FieldsCase Study
Grass Cutting
Our grass cutting operations limit 
clipping removal to fine turf sports and high profile grass sward area 
only which negates need of waste 
disposal requirements; in particular, as 
grass clippings left to decompose (in-
situ) sustains 50% (approx.) Nitrogen 
and contain 4% nitrogen (N), 0.5% 
phosphorus (P) and 2% potassium 
(K), plus small amounts of other plant 
nutrients. They also assist feeding soil 
organisms, recycle plant nutrients, and 
contribute organic matter to the soil 
structure. 
Whilst removal of grass clippings would 
provide residents with an immediate, more aesthetically pleasing appearance to their lawns, it is estimated this 
would generate 133,358 kilograms of 
grass clippings (133.36 tonnes) per cut 
and a total of 1,600 tonnes (approx.) per annum and £77,000 (approx.) in disposal costs, which does not take 
account of increased transport vehicle 
emissions. 44 Ref Activity Lead Timescale  Resources Cost/benefit CO2 reduction target
       2020 2025  2030 
B3	 Explore 	further 	optioms 		 HOS	 Sept	2019	 Officer	time	 This	would	produce	
	 	 for	increased	organic		 SS	 	 	 both	carbon	and	 	 	
	 	 waste	diversion	from		 	 	 	 financial	savings. 	
	 	 the 	residual 	(black) 	bin		
	 	 into	the	organic		
	 	 (green)	bin	waste			 	 stream.	 	B1	 Develop	a	wild		 HOS	 Sept	2019	 Officer	time	 This	would	include	
	 	 planting	policy	for		 SS	 	 	 regimes	that	attract		 	
	 	 parks	and	public	open		 	 	 	 wildlife	and	supports	
	 	 space	areas	where		 	 	 	 their	habitat	adaptation		
	 	 appropriate.	 	 	 	 to	climate	change.	
B2	 In	line	with	legislation		 HOS	 Sept	2019	 Officer	time	 For	the	Council, 	such	
	 	 and	as	and	when		 SS	/	 	 	 information	will	support	
	 	 legislation	allows; 		 HOS	 	 	 the	existing	information	
	 	 Through	the	planning		 Planning	 	 	 for	consideration	of	
	 	 process, 	for	major		 	 	 	 a	range	of	issues	when	
	 	 new	developments, 		 	 	 	 considering	planning	
	 	 require	that	the		 	 	 	 applications	and	
	 	 development		 	 	 	 assessing	the	
	 	 mitigates	through		 	 	 	 sustainability	
	 	 open	space	allocation		 	 	 	 of	a	planning	
	 	 and	planting	for		 	 	 	 application. 	
	 	 public	health	and	the			 	 environment.	 	 	Action Plan
B4	 Develop	Council		 HOS	 Mar	2020	 Officer	time	 This	strategy	will	assist	 Re	–		 Re	–		 Re	–		
	 	 Strategy	for	 	 	 	 the	Council	meeting	its	 cycling	 cycling	cycling	
	 	 delivering	against	 	 	 	 targets	for	waste	and	 43%	 50%	 60%	
	 	 the	EU	 ‘Circular	 	 	 	 recycling	and	will	
	 	 Economy’	targets	of	 	 	 	 increase	dry-recycling	 	
	 	 65%	by	2035.	 	 	 	 	(burgundy	bins)	–		
	 	 	 	 	 	 improving	recycling		
	 	 	 	 	 	 rates	and	reducing		
	 	 	 	 	 	 landfill	waste. 	
	 	 	 	 	 	 Measure; 	baseline		
	 	 	 	 	 	 recycling	rates	currently		
	 	 	 	 	 	 41%	in	2018.45
Theme eight:
Procurement46Theme 8 - Procurement
Sustainable procurement is a way 
of buying goods, services, work and utilities that meets our value for money expectations whilst generating benefits to our communities and minimising damage to our environment.
Traditional procurement has focused 
upon value for money considerations.  The aim of sustainable procurement is to take greater account of social and environmental considerations when purchasing or deciding to purchase with the goal of reducing adverse impacts upon 
the health of individuals and communities, 
social impact and environmental impact 
thereby bringing greater benefits to the community at large.
Procuring in a sustainable manner can 
achieve greater value for money as ‘whole life costs’ will be taken into account.  Taking such a procurement approach can also stimulate the market for sustainable technologies, improve our communities’ standard of living, improve health and the environment and save money.
Local authorities with their extensive 
procurement activity have an opportunity to have a significant impact in relation to carbon reduction through the implementation of a sustainable procurement process.  Progress to date
• The Council use local frameworks - Efficiency East Midlands (EEM), local contractors and where possible local manufacturers.
• Our procurement team seek best value for money whilst sourcing local goods and services.
• Our procurement team request suppliers to demonstrate that they have an environmental policy.
• The use of E-tendering system for all procurement activities.
Case Study
The ‘Intend’ Procurement 
System
The Procurement team at Bolsover DC & NEDDC have been providing a cradle to grave Procurement process via the In-tend system since the team was established in May 2018.
The system has created efficiencies 
in terms of the whole procurement tendering process is operated electronically through the portal.  Projects once identified are created on the system attaching the relevant tender documents including tender returns, specifications associated documents for suppliers to view and return electronically. Upon receipt 47
 Ref Activity Lead Timescale  Resources Cost/benefit CO2 reduction target
       2020 2025  2030 
P3	 Consider 	a	sustainability 		 Procure-	 Implement	by	Mar	2019.	 Officer	time	 Encourage 	sustainability	 10%	 20%	 30%	 	
	 	 criteria	matrix	for		 ment	 	 	 through	supply	chain	in	
	 	 tenders	-		criteria	will		 manager.	 	 	 a	way	that	is	
	 	 be	appropriate	to		 	 	 	 appropriate	to	supplier	
	 	 both	supplier	and	size		 	 	 	 Measure; 	baseline	–		
	 	 of	contract.	 	 	 	 previous	similar		
	 	 	 	 	 	 contract	for	goods/	
	 	 	 	 	 	 services	or	construction		
	 	 	 	 	 	 pre	2019		
	 	 	 	 	 	 (where	possible).	P1	 Review	and	update		 Procure-	 Implement	by	Mar	2019.	 Officer	time	 A	clear	and	efficient	 10%	 20%	 30%	
	 	 procurement	strategy		 ment	 	 	 policy	can	achieve	
	 	 to	include	sustainable	 manager.	 	 	 greater	value	throug	
	 	 procurement	target.	 	 	 	 h	reducing	cost	
	 	 	 	 	 	 and	CO2	emissions	
	 	 	 	 	 	 Measure; 	baseline	–		
	 	 	 	 	 	 previous	similar		
	 	 	 	 	 	 contract	for	goods/	
	 	 	 	 	 	 services	or	construction		
	 	 	 	 	 	 pre	2019	(where		
	 	 	 	 	 	 possible).	
P2	 Seek	out	ISO14001/	 Procure-	 Implement	by	Mar	2019.	 Officer	time	 ISO14001	and	EMAS		 	 EMAS	certified		 ment	 	 	 are	the	most	credible	
	 	 companies	where	 manager.	 	 	 and	robust	
	 	 appropriate.	 	 	 	 environmental		
	 	 	 	 	 	 management		
	 	 	 	 	 	 certifications	an		
	 	 	 	 	 	 organisation	can		
	 	 	 	 	 	 achieve.	 	 	Action Planof tenders following the close of the project, the team opens and downloads the submissions for evaluation together with an evaluation sheet for officers and forwards electronically.
The E-procurement system has reduced 
the need for paper files, and documents, opening ceremonies, officers/members 
time and the need for traveling to sites in 
addition to any postal charges.  The system 
has streamlined tendering and created an efficient process, with the added value of a full audit trail and allows for large tender files to be accessed electronically with a capacity of up to 20 megabytes.  All of which would otherwise be hard copies both sent out and returned.
We advertise on Source East Midlands 
too with the link being automatic for suppliers, thus encouraging  local, SME’s and national suppliers to tender for business with the Council.48Performance Management
Many different actions involving a large 
number of departments, organisations and stakeholders will be needed to deliver this plan, this section outlines the governance and other arrangements which will be put in place to  achieve these.
This plan seeks to draw together a range 
of strategic, tactical and operational activity being undertaken by many partners in many different areas of influence in order to collaboratively reduce carbon emissions in the district.
Bringing the Carbon Reduction Plan into 
operation successfully across the Council, will be the result of good programme management.  This will involve senior and strategic ownership of the Carbon Reduction Plan.
The Joint Strategic Director – People, will 
implement a robust monitoring system which will be implemented in 2019.  To assess the overall impact of these activities in moving Bolsover district to become a low carbon area the plan will be monitored through the Transformation Governance Group and reported to the Customer Service and Transformation Scrutiny Committee, Executive and Council.  To support this, the establishment of a Carbon Reduction Sub Group will enable the Council to manage, monitor and review the action plans and consider new ideas that may be generated throughout the lifetime of the plan.  This group will have the following composition;
Chair - Portfolio Holder for Finance and 
Resources & Sustainable Energy.
Lead Officer - Joint Strategic Director – 
People.
Finance Lead - JHOS Finance and 
Resources.
Thematic leads;
• Theme 1 – Sustainable Buildings and Workplaces – JHOS Property and Estates
• Theme 2 – Renewable Energy - JHOS Property and Estates.
• Theme 3 – Low Carbon Fleet - JHOS Streetscene.
• Theme 4 – Transport – JHOS Partnership and Transformation.
• Theme 5 – Planning - JHOS Planning
• Theme 6 – Community and Collaboration – JHOS Legal and 
Governance.
• Theme 7 – Biodiversity - JHOS 
Streetscene.
• Theme 8 – Procurement - JHOS Finance, Revenues and Resources.49
Programme support;
• Communications, Marketing and 
Design Manager.
• Home Improvement Co-ordinator.
• Partnership Strategy and Policy Team.
During the 11 year life of the Carbon Reduction Plan, it is expected that 
carbon management will become the 
responsibility of every employee within Bolsover District Council.  This will be essential if the 50% aspirational reduction target is to be realised.
Other actions to ensure that carbon 
management becomes the responsibility of everyone within the organisation include;
• As part of the transformation 
programme, senior management will be encouraged to adopt a culture of ‘carbon consideration’ – they will recognise it as a key element of prudent financial management; aligned with the Council’s drive for cost reduction, income generation and service re-design.• Each service will ensure that the carbon management plan is embedded in service plans to become part of everyday Council planning, operation and delivery – making part of the corporate consciousness and a fundamental element of the new ‘Corporate Plan’.50Designed and printed by Bolsover District Council  9638We speak
your  language
Polish
Mówimy Twoim
językiem
Slovak
Rozprávame
Vaším jazykom
Chinese
໡ૌ߶ඪ୆֥ე࿽
If you require
this publication in
large print 
or another format  
please call us on
01246 242424We speak your language
Polish
Mówimy Twoim językiem
SlovakRozprávame Vaším jazykom
Chinese໡ૌ߶ඪ୆֥ე࿽
If you require this publication in
large print  or another format 
please call us on 01246 242424