1 
 
 COUNCIL  
 
Report subject  Response to Climate and Ecological Emergency  
Meeting date  17 December 2019  
Status  Public Report  
Executive summary  To present a draft action plan to meet the commitments of the 
Climate and Ecological Emergency Declaration made  by 
Council on 16 July 2019  and the Corporate Strategy objective 
to ‘tackle the climate change emergency’.  The draft action 
plan should be seen as a summary of options to achieve 
carbon neutrality, since the detail will need to be consulted on 
with residents and stakeholders in order for it to be finalised.  
Recommendations  It is RECOMMENDED that  Council supports the following 
course of action:  
 1. Endorse the draft Climate and Ecological 
Emergency  Action Plan  as the basis for a public 
consultation  with a final report back to Council  
2. To take the delivery of this Council’s Climate and 
Ecological Emergency commitments into account 
in setting the M edium Term Financial Plan, with a 
view to additional financial support being added to 
the Climate Change Reserve (£120k) and Salix 
Fund (£120k)  
3. Continue commitment to participate in the Global 
Covenant of Mayors for Climate and Energy , 
single -use plastic reduction initiatives and work 
towards a plastic -free Council  
4. Development of a new overarching Environment  
Strategy, to include climate change adaptation, 
mitigation, ecolog y and all related issues . 
Reason for 
recommendations  To allow the Council to meet its commitments under the 
Climate and Ecological Emergency Declaration  and help 
global efforts to keep climate warming below 1.5oc to avoid 
further environmental damage, population displacement, 
biodiversity loss and risk to life.  
2 
 
 Portfolio Holder(s):  Councillor Dr Felicity Rice – Portfolio Holder for Environment 
and Climat e Change  
Corporate Director  Kate Ryan - Corporate Director of Environment and 
Community  
Contributors  Larry Austin – Director of Environment  
Neil Short – Sustainability Manager (Green Economy and 
Energy)  
Roxanne King – Sustainability Manager (Environment and 
Green Economy)  
Wards  All  
Classification  For Decision  
Title:  
 
Background  
1. On 16 July 2019, BCP Council declared a Climate and Ecological Emergency. 
The headline commitments of this were to make BCP Council and its 
operations carbon neutral by 2030, and to work with partners to set a target 
date for when  the Bournemouth, Christchurch and Poole region can be made 
carbon neutral, ahead of the UK target of 2050. An action plan was required 
to be  submitted to Council in December 2019 . 
 
Climate & Ecological Emergency Action Plan  
2. The draft Climate & Ecological Emergency Action Plan is presented at 
Appendix A. This contains  actions selected to achieve the Council emission 
reduction target by 2030 and actions to help achieve the area -wide target pre -
2050.  Council is requested to confirm support for the draft Action Plan  
(Recommendation 1) , on the understanding that t his will then form the basis 
of a number of public consultation s dur ing 2020 and used as the starting point 
for further work by the Climate Action Members Working Group, the Climate 
Action  Council Steering Group and the Climate Action Place Leadership 
Board.  This is not an exhaustive list of  the actions required to achiev e the 
Place target. Many more , some utilising innovative technologies not yet widely 
available, will be needed and  the scale of many of the projects means that 
each will require detailed assessment , consultation  and approval.   
3. The Action Planning process h as drawn on the ideas of the public  (submitted 
via the Council website) , Elected Members, officers,  published research and 
the work of other councils  and best practice guides (including those produced 
by Friends of the Earth, Association of Public Service Excellence (APSE) and 
Ashden).  3 
 
 4. The draft Action Plan should be viewed against the background of the 
Committee on Climate Change (CCC) recommendations that Government 
must take significant action nationally, including: decarbonising electricity, 
developing hydrogen production, making homes and businesses  energy 
efficient , increasing Electric Vehicle uptake, t ree growing , aviation and 
shipping efficiency/reduction , decarbonising the gas grid , reducing all waste 
and banning biodegradable waste from landfills. The Government response to 
this confirmed that it is largely in agreement with the recommendations. 
Therefore, local authorities should encourage  the Government to push ahead 
with these i mprovements.  
5. There is also a need for d evelopment of a new overarching BCP Council 
Environment Strategy  (Recommendation 4) . This would  take account of 
climate change adaptation, mitigation and the ecological aspects of the 
Climate and Ecological Emergency . It would also include all related issues  
contributing to and being affected by climate change, such as air quality, 
waste and recycling, energy efficiency and biodiversity.  
 
Emissions data  
6. Benchmark data has been compiled on Council and area -wide emissions. It 
should be noted that figures shown are derived from data made available in 
2019, the year of BCP Council formation.  
Table 1 below contains the total carbon dioxide emissions for the C ouncil and 
administrative area.  
Table 1  
Carbon Dioxide 
Emissions  Scope 1  Scope 2  Scope 3  Total  
BCP Council area 
(tonnes CO 2e) 2017 
data, produced 2019  1,027,343 530,004 385,984 1,943,331  
BCP Council operations 
(tonnes CO 2e) 2018/19  8,523  7,202  3,931 
(estimated)  19,656 
(estimated)  
 
Council Scope 1 emissions are from the direct burning of fuel (gas in 
buildings, diesel in vehicles), Scope 2 emissions are indirect, from the 
generation of the electricity we buy, and Scope 3 emissions are caused 
outside o ur boundary by our activities (staff travel, waste disposal and items 
we procure). This is illustrated at Fig. 1. Council emissions for Scope 1 and 2 
have been calculated directly from consumption data. Scope 3 requires 
further work to confirm sources and c alculate quantities , so at this point it has 
been estimated to be of the same proportion as the area Scope 3 emissions 
(20% of the total emissions).  
 4 
 
  
 
7. Area -wide emissions data has been made available to the Council from its 
ongoing involvement in the Global Covenant of Mayors for Climate and 
Energy. Emissions in Scopes 1, 2 and 3, are based on the latest emissions 
data provided by the Government for 2017 . This is illustrated at Fig.2.  
 
 
 
8. It is proposed that BCP Council continue to participate in beneficial climate -
relevant programmes including: Global Covenant of Mayors for Climate and 
Energy  to monitor and report on progress annually (Recommendation 3), 
ensuring that our efforts attract global attention and opportunities for 
collaboration and continue to support plastic -free initiatives corporately and in 
the community to help marine ecosystems remain healthy and therefore 
continue to be useful stores o f global CO 2. 
 
9. To deliver on the Council’s commitments, additional financial support is 
required. It is possible to achieve the Council target in year one by offsetting 
all Council emissions immediately, by buying reductions generated by others  
but this  does not reduce our actual emissions. These continue to contribute to 8,523
7,2023,931Fig. 1. BCP Council: Total 2018/19 Operational 
Emissions (tCO2e) by scope
Scope 1 (gas/fuel use)
Scope 2 (electricity use)
Scope 3 (estimated emissions elsewhere from Council activities)
1,027,343
530,004385,984Fig.2. BCP Council Area: Total 2017 Area -Wide 
Emissions (tCO2e) by scope
Scope 1 (gas/fuel use)
Scope 2 (electricity use)
Scope 3 (emissions elsewhere from activities within the BCP Council boundary)5 
 
 climate change, while the annual cost of offsetting increases, placing further 
pressure on finances. It is intended that the limited amount of emissions 
remaining at 2030 will be offset by  local tree -planting and biodiversity 
programmes  or renewable energy installations , which are a more reliable and 
accurate option .  
 
10. It is recommended that the Climate Change Reserve be replenished as 
current funds are fully allocated to energy saving proj ects. To fund feasibility 
studies for energy -efficient retrofit of buildings and renewable energy 
installations a sum of £120k is requested.  
 
11. In addition, the ‘Salix’ fund to loan Council  services funds to carry out energy 
improvements is near -fully spent  and a top -up of a further £120k is sought 
(this is then match -funded by Government).  
 
 
Summary of financial implications  
12. Achieving the recommendations contained in the Draft Climate & Ecological 
Emergency Action Plan presented with this report will requi re substantial 
revenue and capital funding, much of which is currently not identified. 
However, this report requests that Council approves the draft Action Plan  for 
onward public consultation . It is to be understood that many  of the individual 
projects con tained within it will require appropriate  consideration , consultation  
and approval, following corporate procedures. Additional financial support is 
required to be added to the Climate Change Reserve (£120k) and Salix Fund 
(£120k). This represents an in-year financial implication for 2019/20 and will 
be met though the 2020/21 budget setting process for the Environment and 
Community Directorate.  
Summary of legal implications  
13. There are many legal implications in delivery of the draft Action Plan that wi ll 
be considered as each project moves forward. In addition, an environmental 
law organisation has recently given notice to one hundred local authorities 
that have declared a Climate Emergency (including BCP Council), and are 
revising their Local Plans, th at they will challenge those that do not sufficiently 
take account of the Climate Emergency in their new Local Plan.  
Summary of human resources implications  
14. Considering the scale of the proposed actions and possible projects, if the 
BCP Climate & Ecologic al Emergency is to be meaningfully addressed it will 
require additional human resources. Some actions may require external 
expertise to deliver individual projects (e.g. Citizens Assembly) whilst others 
would last the duration of the project and so would r equire new Council posts 
(e.g. Climate Change Support Officer). We will continue to explore re -focusing 
of roles within the Environment Directorate and wider Council to minimise 
costs and use resources efficiently.  6 
 
 Summary of environmental impact  
15. In addressing the BCP Council Climate and Ecological Emergency, the 
actions proposed in this report are intended to deliver a carbon neutral 
Council and wider area.  
Summary of public health implications  
16. Climate change will result in heatwaves, extreme weathe r events, floods, 
disease and increased cancer risk. The measures to reduce it will limit the 
dangers and those activities can also have direct positive health effects (e.g. 
increased fitness from cycling and better air quality from reducing car 
journeys).  
Summary of equality implications  
17. There are no negative impacts identified on the protected characteristics 
groups of the Equalities Act 2010 from the recommendations in this report.  
However, an Equalities Impact Assessment will be undertaken , as necessar y, 
for individual  projects in the draft Action Plan before commencement to 
ensure this.   
Summary of risk assessment  
18. We are uncertain of the full extent that the effects of climate change will have 
on our area but  know it will be more severe if we do not a ct now. N on-
achievement of our declaration commitments will contribute to a further 
degraded and hostile global environment – with local consequences, lack of 
energy supply resilience for the area and legal challenge from environmental 
organisations. Howev er, acting positively and rapidly, many of the actions that 
are proposed will help to make our society thrive. Having declared a Climate 
and Ecological Emergency, a risk identified is that of non -achievement of 
targets, which will result in reputational da mage from negative publicity 
(locally, nationally and internationally).  As we move to implementation and 
projects develop, business cases will consider  further associated risks  and 
benefits.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 
 
 Background papers  
 
Published works  
 
https://www.gov.uk/government/news/uk -becomes -first-major -economy -to-pass -net-
zero-emissions -law 
 
BCP Council Climate and Ecological Emergency: 
https://democracy.bcpcouncil.gov.uk/mgAi.aspx?ID=1065  
 
Appendi x  
 
A. Draft Climate and Ecological Emergency Action Plan (2020 – 2030/2050)  
for consultation  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 
 
   9 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Draft Climate and Ecological Emergency  
Action Plan (2020 – 2030/2050)  
for consultation  
 
 
  
Appendix A  10 
 
 Draft Climate and Ecological Emergency Action Plan (2020 – 2030/2050)  for 
consultation  
 
Contents  
 
1. Executive Summary  
 
2. Introduction  
 
3. The BCP Council Climate and Ecological Emergency  
 
4. Council actions since declaring the Climate and Ecological Emergency  
 
5. The Key Commitments  examined  
 
6. Drivers for responding urgently to the Climate and Ecological Emergency   
 
7. Draft Climate and Ecological Emergency Action Plan  (2020 – 2030/2050) for 
consultation  – Action Areas:  
 Energy  
 Buildings  
 Planning  and Land Use  
 Travel  
 Nature  
 Adaptation  
 Waste  
 Doing things differently  
 Working together  
 Implementation  
 
8. BCP Council emissions from our own operations  
 BCP emission base line data  
 BCP Council emission reduction milestones  
 
9. Area -wide emissions  
 Area -wide emissio n baseline data  
 Area -wide Paris Agreement emission reduction pathway for BCP area  
 Area -wide emission reduction milestones  
 
10.  Background Papers  
 
 
 
  11 
 
  
1. Executive Summary  
 
Each day seems to bring new evidence that our activities as humans are causing the 
planet to get warmer . This in turn is causing changes to our climate that will be 
extremely harmful to our future if we don't act now.  
 
BCP Council  took the decision to declare a Climate and Ecological Emergency in 
July 2019, following the same action by UK Parliament, the Committee on Climate 
Change 'net zero carbon 2050 ’ report and a groundswell in public opinion supporting 
this course of action.  
 
This document is the Council's draft Climate and Ecological Emergency Action Plan, 
setting out the course of action we will carry out for the Council and wider area to 
become carbon neutral. This is the first step towards a carbon neutral future for 
Bourne mouth, Christchurch and Poole, which will involve lifestyle changes for us all.  
 
This draft Action Plan  will be open for public consultation so that all members of the 
community can comment on the proposals.  
 
The actions we propose to make the Council carb on neutral by 2030 include 
reducing the need for our staff to travel, making our buildings very energy efficient, 
generating more power from renewable resources and minimising our waste.    
 
The actions w e propose to contribute towards making  the area carb on neutral before 
2050  include creating a supportive environment with sustainable planning policies, 
transport infrastructure improvements , energy efficiency and waste minimisation 
schemes.  These actions will be presented  to stakeholders for discussion  and to 
foster  joint working  to enable all organisations to contribute to a carbon neutral area.  
 
Most importantly, every resident will need to play their part by doing things 
differently. We look forward to working with you to help these improvements take 
place and create a better future for us all.  
  12 
 
  
2. Introduction  
 
On 1 May 2019 the UK parliament became the world's first national parliament to 
declare a Climate and Ecological Emergency. It has since a mend ed the UK's 
Climate Change Act to legislate for Net Zero carbon emissions by 2050.This 
coincided with publication of the report from the Committee on Climate Change  
(CCC),  ‘Net Zero – The UK’s contribution to stopping global warming ’ (May 
2019), which recommend ed this new target .  
 
The Government Response to the CCC Report ‘ Leading on Clean Growth : 
Reducing UK Emissions’ (BEIS, 2019)  confirms that the Government is aligned 
with most of the CCC’s recommendations. It states that the Government has 
allocated £2bn to decarbonisation projects  since the ‘net zero by 2050’ target 
amendment was ratified, much of it to the areas of hydrogen, carbon capture and 
green finance. Action is promised on the built environment, specifically 
commercial building energy efficiency standards, and transport, wh ich is now the 
UK’s most emitting sector. The Department for Transport will publish  a plan  in 
2020  to decarbonise all mode s of transport .  
 
In addition, the Environment Bill introduced to parliament in October 2019 is 
intended to be a  key vehicle for deliv ering the vision set out in the Government’s 
25 Year Environment Plan . The Bill sets out a post-Brexit  domestic framework for 
environmental governance , including the establishment of a new  Office for 
Environmental Protection , to ensure  urgent and meaningfu l action to deal with the 
environmental and climate crisis. The Bill introduces many initiatives connected 
to climate change: mandatory biodiversity net gain  - the requirement for  new 
developments to enhance biodiversity , consistency of local authority mat erials 
recycling, charges on single -use plastic products, measures to tackle both 
droughts and flooding and improvements in air quality. Local authorities will be 
key to effective implementation of the proposals.  
 
2019 has seen continuing public protests pressing for action on climate change. 
This increased awareness and concern was flagged by t he Government’s 
Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (BEIS) Public Attitudes 
Tracker , published in March 2019 , in which 80% of the public said th ey were 
either fairly or very concerned about climate change. This is the highest 
proportion of overall concern since the survey started.  
 
BCP Council is one of over 260 local authorities who have announced Climate 
Emergency Declarations – 64% of UK councils. Whilst the scope and targets 
within these varies widely, BCP Council’s is in line with the more ambitious.  
  13 
 
 3. The BCP Council Climate and Ecological Emergency  
 
On 16 July 2019, a Climate and Ecological Emergency motion was endorsed, 
committing the C ouncil to the actions below. A progress update is shown under each 
commitment.  
i. Declare a ‘Climate and Ecological Emergency’;  
(Declare d 16 July 2019)  
ii. Pledge to make BCP Council and its operations carbon neutral by 
2030, taking into account both production and consumption 
emissions (scope 1, 2 and 3);  
(Now a key objective in the Council Corporate Plan)  
iii. Work with partners, businesses and t he wider community to 
investigate, make recommendations and set a target date for how 
early the Bournemouth, Christchurch and Poole region can be 
made carbon neutral, ahead of the UK target of 2050;  
(Climate Action Place Leadership Board will meet in early  2020)  
iv. Call on Westminster to provide the powers and resources to make 
the 2030 and other interim targets possible;  
(Council has, and will continue to, communicate with Government)  
v. Work with other governments (both within the UK and 
internationally) to det ermine and implement best practice methods 
to limit Global Warming to less than 1.5°C;  
(This is ongoing via involvement in Global Covenant of Mayors, 
APSE, ADEPT, Key Cities)  
vi. Continue to work with partners across the city region to deliver this 
new goal th rough all relevant strategies and plans;  
(Climate Action Place Leadership Board will meet in early 2020)  
vii. Set-up a Citizens’ Assembly to enable views of the general public to 
be taken into account ; 
(Included in the draft Action Plan)  
viii. Report to Full Council within six months with the actions the Council 
will take to address this emergency. As discussed with officers an 
action plan with clear quantifiable milestones should be submitted 
to Full Council in December 2019.  
(This document presented to Council on 17  December 2019)  
  14 
 
 4. Council a ctions since declaring a Climate and Ecological Emergency  
Since declaring the Climate and Ecological Emergency the Council has taken steps 
to begin delivering progress at every opportunity. These short -term a ctions include:  
 
 Setting up of a governance structure comprising: a cross -party Member 
Working Group and sub -groups to provide Councillor oversight and 
guidance, a Carbon Action  Council Steering Group to guide work on the 
Council’s own 2030 target and a Carbon Action Place Leadership Board of 
stakeholders to build support across institutions, create strategy and 
mobilise action on the area -wide pre -2050 target.  
 
 Climate Change and Sustainability have been made key priorities within 
the Council’s Organisational Design Programme (restructuring operational 
assets and using behaviour change, smarter working and technology to 
limit staff travel  and reduce resource use ) as well as the People Strategy 
which will set the culture of the organisation.  
 
 From October 2019, 82% of  Council electricity has been sourced from 
renewable  UK generation. In April 2020 all the Council’s electricity will be 
renewable and our Scope 2 footprint will be greatly reduced . 
 
 A public ‘Climate Emergency – Your Ideas’ page has been added to the 
Counc il website at: www.bcpcouncil.gov.uk/climate  to enable direct 
submission of community views and suggestions for action. These have 
fed into the draft Action Planning process and will be considered by the  
Climate Action Members Working Group.  
 
 Climate Emergency Staff Communications have been created and the 
Autumn and Winter editions of BCP News include articles telling residents 
about the declaration and how to act.  
 
 Aircraft flight emissions from the 201 9 Air festival, amounting to 240 
tonnes , have been ‘offset’ to make that element of the event carbon 
neutral and support projects that reduce carbon emissions. An impact 
assessment is being conducted on the event to inform future activity.  
 
 A BCP Council Senior Managers Network event on the Climate 
Emergency was held on 27 November 2019 to inform on best practice 
from local partners and across the UK.  
 
 Engagement with local b usiness es on the Climate and Ecological 
Emergency at Regional sustaina bility forums.  
  15 
 
 5. The Key commitments examined  
 
Commitment ii: Pledge to make BCP Council and its operations carbon neutral 
by 2030, taking into account both production and consumption emissions 
(scope 1, 2 and 3);  
  
The meaning of ‘ Carbon  Neutral ’ 
Much of the activity generated by the Climate and Ecological Emergency  Declaration 
will be to reduce and avoid carbon emissions. However, the motion uses the term 
‘carbon neutral ’. This means the same as the term used by the Committee on 
Climate Change: ‘n et zero carbon’. Being carbon neutral or h aving a net zero carbon 
footprint  means that we are  balancing any carbon released with the same amount 
sequestered (captured and stored) or offset  (made up for by sponsoring carbon -
reducing activities elsewhere) .  
 
The meaning of ‘S cope 1, 2 and 3 ’  
The G reenhouse Gas Protocol classifies a n organisation’s  emissions into : 
 Scope 1  emissions are direct emissions from owned or controlled sources  - 
fuel combustion in buildings (e.g. gas) and Council -owned vehicles (e.g. 
diesel  fuel) 
 Scope 2 emissions are indirect emissions  from the generation of purchased 
energy  (e.g. electricity)  
 Scope 3 emissions are all indirect emissions (not included in  scope 2)  
occurring outside the area (e.g. from p urchased goods  and services , business 
travel , staff commuting , waste disposal  and i nvestments ) 
BCP Council’s Climate and Ecological Emergency Declaration  commits the Council 
to making all three scopes carbon neutral by 2030. Progress will be measured in 
tonnes of Carbon Dioxide equivalent (CO 2e). This allows inclusion of other 
greenhouse gases that are produced alongside carbon dioxide when fossil fuels ar e 
burned, which also have a warming effect in our atmosphere. However, some data 
used in this report gives measurements and projections for carbon dioxide ‘from 
energy only ’. These are expressed as CO 2. 
 
Commitment iii: Work with partners, businesses and t he wider community to 
investigate, make recommendations and set a target date for how early the 
Bournemouth, Christchurch and Poole region can be made carbon neutral, 
ahead of the UK target of 2050;  
 
The work on Commitment ii makes a small contribution to Commitment iii: achieving 
carbon neutrality for the BCP region. This challenging undertaking will require the 
support and mobilisation of the population and organisations operating in the BCP 
area, along with Government action , to do before 2050 what the C ouncil aims to 
achieve by 2030. Where as the Council controls its own resources and has drafted  a 
clear action plan to become carbon neutral by 2030, the process of creating a carbon 
neutral region must involve a wide range of players to do likewise. As a f irst step 
towards achieving this, the Council is facilitating  a Carbon Action  Place Leadership 
Board  of influential partners that can lead and support the wider area to become 
carbon neutral.  16 
 
 6. Drivers for responding urgently to the Climate and Ecological  Emergency  
 
The Council is committed to taking decisive action after declaring the Climate and 
Ecological Emergency. Although the target dates may at first seem distant, the case 
for urgent action is made by the Tyndall Centre for Climate Change Research i n their 
report: Local and Regional Implications of the United Nations Paris Agreement on 
Climate Change (2019). This states that if we are to stay within the Paris Agreement 
global warming threshold of ‘well below 2oc’, ‘end point targets such as ‘net zero’ by 
2050…can be useful indicators of ambition, but it is ultimately the cumulative CO 2 
released on the way to that target that is of primary significance to achieving climate 
change goals.’ To this end, the Council will develop carbon budgets to clear ly guide 
its progress towards its 2030 target, aiming to make significant reductions as soon 
as possible, whilst the Climate Action  Place Leadership Board will similarly consider 
data on the yearly reductions needed to support the Paris Agreement and bring  the 
area successfully to the pre-2050 target.  In addition to addressing climate change, 
there are other reasons for creating a low carbon area:  
 
Economy:  There are clear economic advantages to reducing energy use. Place -
based Climate Action Network (PCAN)  reports from 2017 estimate that the BCP area 
spent £610 million on energy and fuel, of which £119 million could have been saved 
if available energy efficiency and low carbon measures were taken up by residents 
and businesses. This is calculated to reduce CO 2 emissions by between 25 -30% and 
potentially create 1,385 years of employment in low carbon industries. Furthermore, 
the Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change and the Environment (part of 
the London School of Economics and Political Science) con cludes in its report ‘How 
to price carbon to reach net -zero emissions in the UK’ (2019), that a ‘carbon price 
could start at around £40 per tCO 2 in 2020, rising to £125 per tCO 2 or more in 2050.’ 
This is intended to illustrate that the cost of taking simpl e energy -efficiency measures 
today will be far lower than waiting for future technological fixes, such as ‘carbon 
capture and storage’, that are anticipated to be much more expensive. The UK low 
carbon and renewable energy economy grew by 6.8% in 2017 to r each almost £45 
billion. Over the last ten years, annual growth of the UK Gross Domestic Product 
(GDP) has been between 1.5% and 3.1% while the green economy has consistently 
grown at around 5% (Ashden, 2019).  
 
Ecology:  A large amount of carbon is stored i n the natural environment, so it is in 
our interests to maintain habitats and biodiversity. The State of Nature report 2019, 
from the State of Nature Partnership (a coalition of over 70 conservation 
organisations) found that over 50 years of monitoring, 41 % of UK terrestrial and 
freshwater species have decreased in abundance. It concludes : ‘Climate change is 
driving widespread changes in the abundance, distribution and ecology of the UK’s 
wildlife, and will continue to do so for decades or even centuries to  come. The 21st 
century so far has been warmer than the previous three centuries. Since the 1980s, 
average UK temperatures have increased by nearly 1°C.’ The IPBES Global 
Assessment Report on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (2019) finds that 
globally, ‘around 1 million animal and plant species are now threatened with 
extinction, many within decades, more than ever before in human history.’ 
Biodiversity is our ally, so must be protected and enhanced, trees and plants take in 
and store carbon, whilst it h as been found that in the UK’s most deprived groups, the 
number of mortalities is halved,  and levels of anxiety are lower in areas with the 
greenest space (Ashden, 2019).  17 
 
  
Health:  Many activities that reduce emissions have health benefits, either from 
reduced pollution or the act of participation. For instance, particulate matter and 
nitrous oxides from transport contribute to around 40,000 air pollution -related deaths 
per year in the UK, whereas active travel promotes good health - an increase in 
physical activity in the UK has been estimated to generate a potential saving to the 
NHS of £17 billion within 20 years. The cost of cold homes to the NHS is estimated 
at £2.5 billion a year, while extreme weather events, such as heatwaves, have 
significant health impacts – the UK heatwaves in 2016 resulted in 908 excess deaths 
(Ashden, 2019).  
 
  18 
 
 7. Draft Climate & Ecological Emergency Action Plan (2020 – 2030/2050)  
 
This draft Action Plan is initially for consultation. Following that it will be a ‘living 
document’ that may be added to and amended to best ensure success in fulfilling the 
commitments of the BCP Council Climate & Ecological Emergency. Many of the  
actions  are intended to be carried out within 5 years  with some scheduled for 
completion nearer the relevant target end date.  
 
Action Areas  
 
Energy  
 
Half of UK electricity generation in 2017 was from low -carbon sources. This low -
carbon electricity generation helps lower emissions in sectors where electricity  is 
consumed , such as  buildings and industry.  Emissions from electricity generation 
have fallen by 50% since 2013 and 64% since1990  as coal use for generation  
declines , electricity demand has fallen and the supply from renewables has 
increased.  Fully decar bonising the electricity  supply can be achieved by increasing 
the share of renewables and low -carbon  power from around 50% today to around 
95% in 2050, whilst meeting additional demand from electric vehicles and heat 
pumps. Decarbonised gas will be require d for the remaining 5% (CCC, 2019) . 
Emissions from electricity use account for 27% and 37% of the Council’s and area -
wide carbon footprint s respectively . Following the declaration of the Climate and 
Ecological Emergency in July 2019, the Council took the d ecision to purchase 
renewable electricity for its buildings, operations and streetlights. Existing contracts 
allowed 82% of electricity for Council use to be renewable from 1 October 2019, with 
the remaining 18% becoming renewable from 1 April 2020. This will reduce the 
Council’s scope 2 emissions dramat ically  from that time. Whilst at the same time we 
will be  reduc ing the amount of electricity used through rationalising our building stock 
and making the buildings we retain as energy efficient as possible.  Householders 
and businesses in the wider BCP area  can follow suit with encouragement and 
grant -funded assistance wherever possible to reduce electricity use and switch to 
electricity from renewable sources.  
 
BCP Council will:   
 Procure all Council electricity from zero-carbon renewable sources  
 Assess the energy efficiency  of Council buildings  
 Review energy project funding options  
 Install energy saving measures in retained Council buildings  
 Install renewable energy measures in retained Council buildings  
 
BCP Council will work with Partners to:  
 Continue the Local Energy Action Partnership scheme to help residents save 
energy at home  
 Promote low carbon grants to businesses  
 Investigate options  to offer residents renewable electricity  19 
 
  Seek to i dentify  and consider purchase of sites for large -scale re newable 
energy installations  
 Consider a cost-effective insulation programme for homes  
 Promote home  energy demand reduction  and low-cost improvements  
 
Buildings  
 
Emissions from buildings have fallen by 13% since 2013 and are around 20%  below 
1990 levels. Current Government commitments for low -carbon homes include  
bringing  as many as possible  up to  Energy Performance Certificate  Band  C by 2035 
and to stop the installation of gas  heating in new homes from 2025 . The CCC 
suggests the next step s to be the roll-out of technologies such as heat  pumps, hybrid 
heat pumps and district heating in conjunction with hydrogen, and new  smart storage 
heating, combined with high levels of energy efficiency. From 2025 , new homes 
should  not be connected to the gas grid  and by 2035 replacement heating systems  
for existing homes must be low -carbon . The current share of low -carbon heating  in 
the UK housing stock  is only  4.5% and must be  90% by 2050. Remaining emissions 
in 2050 would then come from a  small proportion of homes that are very expensive  
or difficult  to treat due to their structure or space  constraints.  The Government 
intends to decarbonise industry through improved energy efficiency and low -carbon 
technologies. These include the ambition to improve business energy effic iency by at 
least 20% by 2030.  To improve comfort levels, lower energy bills and prepare the 
building stock for a switch to low -carbon heating , retrofit of hybrid heat pumps, 
enabling continued use of existing boilers and radiators, could sensibly be done 
alongside energy efficiency improvements  (CCC, 2019) .  
 
BCP Council will:  
 Establish a Corporate Property Group to review accommodation  
 Assess the energy efficiency  of Council buildings  
 Dispose of unwanted/inefficient buildings , after reviewing  their energ y 
efficiency , or redevelop sites to build new carbon neutral homes  
 Implement new accommodation strategy  
 Investigate procurement of zero-carbon green gas for Council  buildings  
 Install energy saving measures in retained Council buildings  
 Install renewable energy measures in retained Council buildings  
 Install water saving measures in retained Council buildings  
 Install waste saving, reuse and recycling measures in retained Council 
buildings  
 Consider r eview  of the land attached to each building asset to establish 
opportunit ies to improve biodiversity and staff involvement  
 Develop a Sustainable Construction Policy for corporate buildings  20 
 
  Publish the bi -annual Home Energy Conservation Act Report to Government  
 Develop a Sustainability Strategy for Housing including improving energy 
efficiency of the Council’s new build programme and considerations for 
retrofitting existing stock  
 Seek to influence the house building sector on sustainability and input to the 
Local P lan on future new build standards  
 Seek to influence landlords on the sustainability of existing stock  
 Enforce Minimum Energy Efficiency Standards in private rented sector  where 
appropriate  
 Tackle the illegal mis -selling of energy products and supplies  
 
BCP Council will work with Partners to:  
 Extend the multi -agency Affordable Warmth Partnership across the BCP area  
 Use ECO -Flex to facilitate energy saving grants to fuel poor residents  
 Consider heating improvement promotion to businesses (boilers, heat pumps  
and heating  controls)  
 Promote cost -effective energy improvements to businesses  
 Consider waste reduction, reuse and recycling improvements  to buildings  
 
Planning and Land Use  
 
Local authorities are regulatory authorities for town and country planning and this 
role can be used to positive effect in the action against climate change. Higher levels 
of energy efficiency in developments and on -site renewable generation of electricity  
can be required (APSE, 2019). The new Local Plan covering Bournemouth, 
Christchurch and Poole is being prepared for publication in 2022 and the Council 
has asked for initial views on key issue s including how to ‘ tackle the challenges 
posed by climate change ’.  
 
BCP Council will:  
 Conduct a review of current sustainable planning policy to aid enforcement  
 Seek to i nclude policies in the new Local Plan for climate change mitigation 
and adaptation, including a policy to encourage zero carbon developments, 
subject to viability testing  
 Seek to i nclude policies in the new Local Plan for Policy for new homes to be 
built to higher than current Building Regs standards  
 Seek to make it a requirement in the Local Plan for renewable energy and 
sustainable waste manag ement to be integrated into all new developments   
 Seek to include Flood Protection Policies in the new Local Plan and policies 
aimed at creating biodiversity net gain  21 
 
  Consider c arrying out a s trategic parking review to examine parking/car club 
standards  
 Encourage energy -efficient/renewable energy retrofitting of homes  
 Investigate the u se of developer contributions (CIL, S106, 273) to fund climate 
change measures  
 Identify suitable areas for large -scale renewable energy in the Local Plan  
 Investigate and promo te install ation of PV on all viable properties  
 Consider identify ing and procur ing land suitable for tree planting schemes and 
other mitigation measures  
 Seek to d evelop incentives for brown field sites awaiting development to be 
used as temporary SUDS and c arbon capture sites  
 Explore greater use of  natural burial over cremation, procuring additional 
space for natural burial, to be used as tree planting sites following burial  
 Consider a r eview  of culverted, piped and covered surface water drains, 
possibly breaking them open as vegetated SUDS  
 Encourage m inimis ing the  use of sealed and non -porous surfaces on all new 
infrastructure projects  
 Seek to p romote develop ment of  green roo fs and walls, street trees and urban 
greening  
 Seek to include Air Quality policy in the new Local Plan  
 
 
 
Travel  
 
UK e missions from transport have increased by 6% since 2013 and are now 4%  
higher than in 1990. Vehicles have become more fuel efficient,  but this has been 
offset  by increasing travel demand.  The Government's current  key commitment is to 
phase -out sales of conventional petrol and diesel cars and vans by 2040.  However, 
the CCC recommends that to achieve net zero carbon, all cars and vans need to be 
electric by 2050, and most HGVs should  be electric, or hydrogen  powered . These 
changes are likely to result in an overall  cost saving  but getting all cars and vans to 
be electric by 2050 will require all sales to be electric by 2035 at the latest . It also 
require s 3,500 rapid and ultra -rapid chargers near motorways and 210,000 public 
chargers in towns and cities.  HGVs are harder to decarbonise , with new research 
suggest ing that it is possible to get to very -low emissions by 2050 by switching most 
of these vehicles to hydrogen power or electrification. A hydrogen -based switchover 
would require 800 refuelling stations to be built by 2050 and electrification would 
need 90,000 depot -based chargers for overnight charging  (CCC, 2019) . 
 
 
 22 
 
 BCP Council will:  
 Consider enhanci ng ‘Cycle to work’ scheme discounts to facilitate increased 
cycling to work, and ‘get back on your bike’ training for less confident cyclists  
 Seek to install more high -quality showers, lockers, changing facilities, secure 
cycle parking for staff at work an d residentially, such as on -street bicycle 
hangers  
 Conduct a review of the Council’s vehicle fleet  
 Publish a BCP Council Corporate Travel Plan  that will be monitored and acted 
upon  
 Consider i ntroduc ing School Travel Plans to all schools to promote 
alternat ives to car use  
 Seek to i mplement measures  to reduce staff car use  
 Introduce ‘ New ways of Working ’, in conjunction with accommodation 
changes and technology  to facilitate  less staff travel  and to reduce the use of 
consumables  
 Continue to expand tele-confe rencing facilities in major buildings  
 Develop a policy/strategy for installing meeting room AV equipment  
 Investigate p rovision of additional  facilities to support active travel  
 Explore d evelop ment of  an extended network of EV charging points for 
Council use to provide certainty of provision  
 Assess the feasibility of congestion  charging options in BCP and other means 
of changing behaviours towards more sustainable options  
 Consider a best practice proportion  of the transport budget to be ring fenced 
for spending on developing Active Travel networks  
 Explore how the taxi licencing criteria could be amended to encourage newly 
licensed vehicles to be  electric or hydrogen  fuelled  
 Consider a r eview of public off -street car parks in main centres  
 Consider a r eview of free workplace car parking (where currently available) for 
staff and elected members  
 Seek to d evelop partnership offers with bus and rail companies for staff 
season ticket discounts on public t ransport  
 Investigate p rovid ing Park and Ride sites  and favourable pricing schedule, 
with secure cycle parking and traffic free cycle route from sites  
 Seek to c arry out Climate Change Assessments on transport projects  
 Investigate r eplace ment of  Council vehicles with zero emission EVs or 
hydrogen vehicles , or alternatives where practicable, such as cargo -bikes  23 
 
  Investigate viability of fleet of cargo -bikes, electric cycles and motor cycles  for 
staff use 
 Promote b ridges and underpasses to include pr oper wildlife crossing 
opportunities  
 Investigate i nvest ment  in ‘safe routes to school ’ includ ing crossings, wider 
pavements  and safe cycle routes  
 Consider rolling out ‘ School Streets ’, where streets around schools become 
pedestrian and cycle access only at  school run times  
 Consider the t rial of temporary measures such as car free days and 
segregated cycle lanes created by movable barriers   
 Investigate a doption of  Streetscape Guidance setting high standards for the 
design of streets and spaces prioritising walking, cycling and public transport  
 
BCP Council will work with Partners to:  
 Develop a BCP Walking and Cycling Strategy 2020 -2035 and expand cycle 
network and storage facilities at major destinations  
 Assess provision of segregated cycle lanes, cycle pr iority at traffic lights and 
training programme for safe cycling  
 Promote and e xpand car club schemes across the BCP Council area  
 Promote and expand the Business Travel Network  
 Investigate provision of e lectrical hook -up points at Port of Poole to enable  
shipping to turn off engines  
 Examine use of sail and solar power for container traffic in Port of Poole  
 Assess the feasibility of  the introduc tion of  electric or hydrogen buses and 
charging /fuelling  infrastructure  
 Seek to w ork with operators to deliver sm art, integrated ticketing  and 
innovative pricing structures to encourage use  
 Investigate c arrying out of a Strategic Parking review and new Parking Policy 
to deliver parking pricing schedule for BCP car parks that  is commensurate 
with reducing car trips fo r commuting and leisure, while providing high quality 
public transport alternative  
 Commence Transforming Cities Fund sustainable travel initiatives  
 Consider a workplace car parking levy to fund sustainable transport  
 Consider installing electric vehicle cha rging points across the conurbation  
 Review feasibility of parking charges at ‘Out of Town Centre’ retail parks  24 
 
  Seek to h old car -free days to encourage modal shift and i nvestigate the 
creation of  car free town centres in Bournemouth, Poole and Christchurch  
 Investigate d evelop ment of  a Freight and Movement of Goods Strategy , to 
look at light goods vehicle  licencing minimum emissions standards  with major 
distributors in logistics sector  
 Seek to w ork with Bournemouth Airport to encourage reduce emissions from  
flights and passenger travel  
 
Nature  
 
Reaching the necessary level of CO ₂ removal through tree planting  by 2050 in the 
UK requires an early and sustained increase in tree -planting rates. These must 
increase from current rates below 10,000 hectares per year to at least 30,000 
hectares per year  (CCC, 2019) . 
 
BCP Council will:  
 Develop a Green Infrastructure Strategy and carbon offsetting plan aiming for  
the 2030  target  
 Investigate the a llocat ion of  land to allow natural woodland generation from 
trees, natu ral habitat  and heathlands at scale to absorb carbon  and become 
‘carbon sinks’  
 Investigate community tree-planting and biodiversity enrichment programme s 
 Assess the i ntroduc tion of  a programme of public realm tree planting  
 Work with Environmental Finance and Vivid Economics to better understand 
the value of parks and open space for nitrate absorption  and carbon 
sequestration  and encourage investment in thi s. 
 Consider r eview all mown amenity sites for woodland creation or allowing 
natural succession.  Amenity being spaces not allocated for recreation, 
pitches etc. such as large verges and greens in housing estates  
 Seek to d evelop native garden spaces within formal parks and recreation 
grounds  
 Work to d evelop information and incentives with partners to encourage better 
practice within private spaces and gardens , such as  hedgehog corridors  and 
native amenity planting  
 Create nature sanctuaries that minimise disturbance for g round nesting birds 
and other animals.  
 
BCP Council will work with Partners to:  
 Investigate  potential of a  large scale tree planting programme  25 
 
  Promote a b an on polluting activities  that are harmful to nature  (e.g. sky 
lantern and balloon releases)  
 Work clo sely with local wildlife groups t o support biodiversification and the 
reintroduction of lost species  
 Work with partners on landscape scale wildlife conservation programmes e.g. 
Stour Valley, Christchurch Harbour and Poole Harbour  
 Encourage developers to in clude habitat measures within residential and 
commercial developments.  Ensure habitat measures are included in all 
council build projects e.g. swift/sparrow boxes, peregrine boxes, bug bricks  
 Investigate natural flood defence and coastal protection oppor tunities  for 
intertidal habitat creation (e.g. saltmarsh ), which can store more carbon than 
woodland  
 
Adaptation  
 
Being prepared for climate change can help communities and councils to lessen the 
disruptive effects. The BCP Council area can expect to be warmer, with more 
intense rainfall and more frequent storms. In England temperatures are now 0.5oC–
1oC higher than they were in the 1970s and sea levels could increase by 12 –76 cm 
by the end of the century, compared to 1990 levels. If emissions remain high, this is 
predicted to be 2 metres by 2100 and could lead to the displacement of hundreds of 
millions of people worldwide (PNAS, 2019). A 2019 NASA study found that 
unchecked emissions will result in the entire Greenland Ice Sheet melting by the 
year 3 000, causing up to 7 meters of sea level rise. Recent storms have led to 
significant costs for councils. The winter storms of 2013 directly cost Kent County 
Council an estimated £4.4 million, rising to over £11 million when taking into account 
repairs to i nfrastructure. Heatwaves increase the demand for health and social care 
services, resulting in costs to providers, including councils, sometimes more than 
£600 per patient per day. Some of these costs will fall on council budgets under the 
Health and Socia l Care Act. At a household level, average domestic fuel bills have 
more than doubled in the last ten years in real terms, pushing large numbers of 
households into fuel poverty. Preparing for climate change, as well as reducing 
carbon emissions, can put cou ncils in the strongest possible position to deal with 
these challenges (Ashden, 2019).  
 
BCP Council will:  
 Update Climate Change Risk Assessment  
 Produce Supplementary Planning Document for climate change place 
adaptation  
BCP Council will work with Partners  to: 
 Create Strategies and Action Plans to engage all sectors in adaptation work  
 Seek to  ensure that via communication, communities and sectors are  aware 
of future risks , pre-emptive actions and how to mitigate   
 26 
 
 Waste  
 
UK emissions from waste have falle n by 69% since 1990, due to the landfill tax  
reduc ing the amount of biodegradable waste going to landfill, and an  increase in 
methane captured at landfill sites. The CCC recommends additional emissions 
reduction from  treatment of waste water , stopping send ing biodegradable waste to 
landfill by 2025  and increasing recycling rates to 70% across the UK  (CCC, 2019) .  
 
BCP Council will:  
 Reduce Council waste sent to landfill and increase recycling from Council 
buildings  
 Reduce resource use, particularly paper for  printing and single -use plastic  
 Unify household waste, recycling and food waste collections across the area 
to increase recycling and reduce residual waste  
 Procure new residual waste disposal and non -residual waste processing 
contracts exercising where p ossible the proximity principle  
 Enhance commercial waste and recycling services offered to local businesses  
 Engage with staff, residents, schools and visitors on waste reduction and 
recycling initiatives and campaigns  
 Seek to p rogress towards  single -use plastic-free status and support 
community plastic -free initiatives  
 Seek to m inimise or cease the sale of single use plastics and encourage 
alternative materials throughout our retail operations  
 Support the Environmental Innovation hub built to inform Seafro nt waste 
reduction  
 
BCP Council will work with Partners to:  
 Support community single -use p lastic -free initiatives  
 Enhance recycling facilities ‘on the go’  
 Support and promote community waste reduction and reuse initiatives such 
as sharing and donation of materials  
 Promote business minimisation of packaging  
 Seek to a pply the proximity principle to treat and/or dispose of wastes in 
reasonable proximity to their point of generation  
 Seek to i nfluence the behaviour of our commercial partners and lessees in 
their retail operations to minimise or cease the sale of single use plastics  
 
 
 
 27 
 
 Doing things differently  
 
Technological improvements can bring about much  carbon saving, but many 
emission red uctions rely on people changing their behaviour. The CCC estimates 
that a round 10% of the emissions reduction in the ir more a mbitio us scenario s involve 
a significant change in societal and consumer behaviours . These include the shift 
towards healthier diets with reduced consumption of meat  and dairy products . Over 
half of the CCC emissions reduction scenarios require some change from 
consumers, such as the  purchase of an electric bike or install ation of  a heat pump.  
The Gover nment must engage with consumers  over why and how they can make 
these improvements and take supporting actions (e.g. ensuring that road 
infrastructure use is a safe option  for all ) and raise  awareness of the need to move 
away from natural gas heating and w hat the alternatives might be. There is a limited 
window to engage with people over future heating choices, to understand their 
preferences and to factor these into strategic decisions on energy infrastructure  
(CCC, 2019) . The Council has recently undergon e a major structural change, with 
Local Government Reorganisation, which puts it in a good position to change 
organisational practices to support a more low -carbon approach. The communities 
served by the Council also have a history of protecting their envi ronment by using 
the services provided by the Council and the Council and partners must ensure this 
co-operation continues.  
 
BCP Council will:  
 Hold a Climate Emergency Citizens Assembly  
 Publish an Engagement Strategy to better involve people in decision -making  
 Introduce a ‘ New Ways of Working ’ behaviour change programme , in 
conjunction with accommodation changes and technology  to encourage less 
staff travel  
 Draw up a n internal Communication Plan  
 Endorse a Zero Carbon Workplace Charter for behaviour change  
 Launch a Decision Impact Assessment tool to embed sustainability  
 Carry out a review and adopt sustainable procurement strategy and guidance 
– including practices to reduce carbon in the supply chain, local sourcing, full-
life-costing and assessment of suppliers to encourage energy and waste 
reduction  
 Promote and encourage low carbon best practice among commissioned 
services  
 Investigate a carbon charge on projects/decisions to fund offsetting  
 Investigate divestment of fossil fuels from the Council Pensio n Fund  
 Promote consistency in decision -making to ensure that we are consistent in 
communicating and acting on this emergency  
 
 28 
 
 BCP Council will work with Partners to:  
 Consider a  ‘Smart Place ’ approach to support new ways of moving around, 
better health outcomes and other community services  
 Launch a  behaviour change programme for residents on all issues , including : 
energy, waste, water, travel, food, shopping  
 Inform residents, businesses and visitors of progress  
 
Working together  
 
Together with partners o n the Climate Action Place Leadership Board, the Council 
will work to improve the voluntary and business sector emissions and collaborate 
with local authorities and others across the world to tackle climate change.  
 
BCP Council will work with Partners to:  
 Develop and agree a science -based emission reduction pathway for the BCP 
area 
 Support  the Voluntary & Community sector to reduce emissions  
 Work with business organisations to signpost them towards  sustainable 
practices  for all business sectors  
 Investigate an integrated policy approach to Climate Change and Air Quality  
 Encourage businesses subject to emissions controls to adopt an 
Environmental Management Polic y 
 Expand the successful Leave Only Footprints environmental awareness 
campaign  
 Submit annual emiss ions data to CDP for Global Covenant of Mayors  
 Participate in networks of similar organisations addressing climate change 
(Covenant of Mayors, LGA, APSE, local and regional partnerships)  
 Consider developing a local offsetting scheme for area-wide emissions  
remaining at 2050  
 
Implementation  
 
BCP Council will:  
 Prioritis e measures that have the most impact  
 Monitor and communicat e progress via a Climate Emergency Annual Report  
 Seek to e stablish 'carbon budgets' for Council services  
 Maintain communication with  Government and encourage positive action on 
all related legislation  
  29 
 
 8. BCP Council emissions from our own operations  
 
Table A 
Carbon Dioxide 
Emissions  Scope 1  Scope 2  Scope 3  Total  
BCP Council operations 
(tonnes CO 2e) 2018/19  8,523  7,202  3,931 
(estimated ) 19,656 
(estimated ) 
 
Council emissions for Scope 1 and 2 have been calculated directly from  
consumption data  – shown in Table A and illustrated in Fig.1 and 2 .  
 
       
 
Scope 3 requires further  work to confirm  sources and calculate emission  quantitie s, 
so at this point it has been estimated to be of the same proportion as the area Scope 
3 emissions (20% of the total emissions). This information is still evolving following 
Local Government Reorganisation, as some emissions will move scope as all local 
services migrate to be under the direct control of BCP Council . Scope 3 will be 
calculated by April 2020, and include emissions from:  
 
 Purchased goods and services  
 Capital goods  
 Upstream transportation and distribution  
 Waste generated in operati ons 
 Business travel  
 Employee commuting  
 End-of-life treatment of sold products  
 Downstream leased assets  
 Investments  
 
  4,868 3,655Fig. 1. BCP Council: Total 2018/19 
Operational Emissions (tCO2e) Scope 1
Stationary Gas (Buildings) Fleet fuel4,9432,259Fig. 2. BCP Council: Total 2018/19 
Operational Emissions (tCO2e) Scope 2
Electricity (Buildings) Electricity (Streetlights)30 
 
 BCP Council emission reduction milestones  
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 3 above illustrates how the actions proposed in the Action Plan are intended to  
reduce the Council’s carbon emissions year -on-year to 2030 . 
 
The decision to purchase renewable electricity in 2019 reduces the Scope 2 
(electricity) amount by 8 2% then in 2020 this reduces further to zero.  
 
Implementation of ‘New Ways of Working’ from 20 20 in conjunction with new 
technology and implementation of the Accommodation Strategy and other behaviour 
changes reduce the Scope 1 (gas/vehicle fuel) amount gradually year on year . This 
reduces  significantly in 2025 when the Accommodation Strategy is fully 
implemented, and assets disposed of. Ongoing energy efficiency works in retained 
buildings and the gradual introduction of EVs in the vehicle fleet further reduce 05,00010,00015,00020,00025,000Fig. 3. BCP Council emission reduction milestones (tonnes CO2e)
Scope 3 (estimated emissions elsewhere from Council activities)
Scope 2 (electricity use)
Scope 1 (gas/fuel use)
2019/20 2020/21 2021/22 2022/23 2023/24 2024/25 2025/26 2026/27 2027/28 2028/29 2029/30
80% green electricity purchased100% green electricity purchased                                              
Behaviour Change reduces gas and vehicle fuel usePrinting reduction reduces energy/resource use                                               
Reduced staff travel/commuting reduces fuel useBuildings retrofitted with insulation/hybrid heat pumps 
and renewables reduces gas/electricity useProcurement practices/travel alternatives/waste 
reduction continues reductionsBuildings disposed of                                                                        
Gradual replacement of small vehicles with EVGreen gas purchased if maximum fuel savings have been 
achievedProcurement practices/travel alternatives/waste 
reduction continues reductionsProcurement practices/travel alternatives/waste 
reduction continues reductionsReplacement of large vehicles with EV or hydrogenRemainder offset by tree planting and renewable 
installations undertaken previously31 
 
 Scope 1 emissions. Procuring green gas will be a consideration, once usage levels 
off, an d in 2028, large vehicles begin to be replaced, bringing the Scope 1 total to 
near zero.  
 
Once the constituent sources of the Council’s Scope 3 emissions have been 
identified and measured, this will be reduced by the reduction in the need for staff 
travel,  due to flexible working. Sustainable travel options will be encouraged for the 
workforce commute. Paper use will be reduced due to new monitoring and reduction 
reporting and waste disposal will be targeted for improvement. It should be stressed 
that the C ouncil’s Scope 3 emissions are not yet known, so the reductions shown in 
Fig.3 are indicative only.  
 
Remaining emissions at 2030 will be offset, preferably by Council renewable energy 
installations, tree planting and biodiversity measures carried out in in tervening years 
and calculated to absorb this amount.  
 
 
  32 
 
 9. Area -wide emission  baseline data  
 
Below is a summary of the 2017 carbon emission data for the BCP Council area, 
made available in 2019. Source data was provided by UK Government . 
 
In line with standardised reporting frameworks, 24 sources of carbon emissions are 
identified but not all have complete figures due to lack of data availability – this will 
be updated as data is published.  Sources with less than 1% of each scope’s total 
emissions or no recorded emissions are omitted from this summary report.  The 
recognised sources of CO 2e are as follows:  
  
- Residential buildings  
- Commercial buildings & facilities  
- Institutional buildings & facilities  
- Industrial buildings & facilities  
- Agriculture  
- Fugitive emissions  
- On-road 
- Rail 
- Waterborne navigation  
- Aviation  
- Off-road 
- Solid waste disposal  - Biological treatment  
- Incineration and open burning  
- Wastewater  
- Industrial process  
- Industrial product use  
- Livestock  
- Land use  
- Other AFOLU  
- Electricity only generation  
- CHP generation  
- Heat/cold generation  
- Local renewable generation  
 
 
  Scope 1 , (1027343
tCO2e, 53% ) Direct 
emissions from 
sources within BCP 
Council boundary (Gas 
used in buildings and 
vehicle fuel used)
Scope 2 , (530004
tCO2e, 27% ) Indirect 
emissions from 
electricity purchased 
for use within the BCP 
Council boundaryScope 3 , (385984
tCO2e, 20% ) Emissions 
produced elsewhere, 
caused by activities 
within the BCP Council 
boundaryFig. 4. BCP Area: Total 2017 Emissions (tCO2e) by 
scope 33 
 
  
 
 B C P BCP Total  Percentage  
Residential buildings  166087.730  50071.000  149655.000  365813.730  35.608%  
Commercial buildings & 
facilities  16193.910  5085.000  19435.000  40713.910  3.963%  
Institutional buildings & 
facilities  24732.040  14633.000  37092.000  76457.040  7.442%  
Industrial buildings & facilities  22632.450  5819.000  26498.000  54949.450  5.349%  
Agriculture  199.920  667.000  354.000  1220.920  0.119%  
On-road  157317.580  72148.000  163300.000  392765.580  38.231%  
Rail 586.300  269.000  842.000  1697.300  0.165%  
Waterborne navigation  3.070  1.000  3.000  7.070  0.001%  
Aviation  0.000  6646.000  0.000  6646.000  0.647%  
Solid waste disposal  33599.450  9108.000  19436.000  62143.450  6.049%  
Wastewater  12183.700  3111.000  9428.000  24722.700  2.406%  
Livestock  69.760  66.000  70.000  205.760  0.020%  
BCP Total  433605.910  167624.000  426113.000  1027342.910  100.000%  
 
  Residential buildings
36%
Commercial buildings 
& facilities
4%
Institutional buildings 
& facilities
8%Industrial buildings & 
facilities
5%On-road
39%Solid waste disposal
6%Wastewater
2%Fig. 5. BCP Area -Scope 1 Emissions 2017 (tCO2e) 34 
 
  
 
 B C P BCP Total  Percentage  
Residential buildings  113322.000  30236.000  90402.000  233960.000  44.143%  
Commercial buildings & 
facilities  13693.000  3992.000  15273.000  32958.000  6.218%  
Institutional buildings & 
facilities  69192.000  20175.000  77177.000  166544.000  31.423%  
Industrial buildings & facilities  40109.000  11695.000  44738.000  96542.000  18.215%  
BCP Total  236316.000  66098.000  227590.000  530004.000  100.000%  
 
  Residential buildings
44%
Commercial buildings 
& facilities
6%Institutional buildings 
& facilities
32%Industrial buildings & 
facilities
18%Fig. 6. BCP Area -Scope 2 Emissions 2017 (tCO2e)  35 
 
  
 
 B C P BCP Total  Percentage  
Residential buildings  46197.000  13195.000  39449.000  98841.000  25.608%  
Commercial buildings & 
facilities  4937.000  1831.000  6083.000  12851.000  3.329%  
Institutional buildings & 
facilities  15603.000  5010.000  18115.000  38728.000  10.034%  
Industrial buildings & facilities  10499.000  3260.000  12244.000  26003.000  6.737%  
Aviation  103274.000  26374.000  79913.000  209561.000  54.293%  
BCP Total  180510.000  49670.000  155804.000  385984.000  100.000%  
 
 
 
Note – Scope 3 data does not include emissions resulting from  financial sector investment  activity   Residential buildings
26%
Commercial buildings 
& facilities
3%
Institutional buildings 
& facilities
10%
Industrial buildings & 
facilities
7%Aviation
54%Fig.7. BCP Area -Scope 3 Emissions 2017 (tCO2e)  36 
 
 Area -wide Paris Agreement emission reduction pathway for BCP Council area 
 
The BEIS -funded ‘ SCATTER’ project has provided an example CO 2 emissions 
reduction pathway for BCP Council (Fig. 8 below) to help achieve the Paris 
Agreement target. This has resulted in the University of Manchester and Tyndall 
Centre for Climate Change Research produc ing a science -based target for the BCP 
area geared  towards achievement of the Paris Protocol’s ‘well below 2oc, pursuing 
1.5oc’ global warming aspiration. This recommends that the BCP area should aim to 
deliver average CO 2 emission cuts of 12. 6% each year to become carbon neutral 
before 2050. This and oth er research will be considered by the Climate Action  Place 
Leadership Board when deciding the most effective way forward  for the area . 
 
It should be noted that this illustrates an ‘energy only CO 2’ pathway.  
 
 
Fig. 8. ‘Energy only ’ suggested Paris Agreement CO 2 emission reduction pathway for  
BCP Council area 
   
University of Manchester/Tyndall  Centre  
 
 
Area -wide emission reduction milestones  
 
To be drawn up and considered by the Climate Action  Place Leadership Board  once 
the Government -supported web -based tool is active.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
37 
 
 10. Background papers  
 
Published works  
 
https://www.gov.uk/government/news/uk -becomes -first-major -economy -to-pass -net-
zero-emissions -law 
 
BCP Council Climate and Ecological Emergency: 
https://democracy.bcpcouncil.gov.uk/mgAi.a spx?ID=1065  
 
Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (BEIS) Public Attitudes 
Tracker  (March 2019 ): 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attach
ment_data/file/800429/BEIS_Public_Attitudes_Tracker_ -_Wave_29_ -
_key_findings.pdf   
 
The Place -based Climate Action Network (PCAN)  reports,  hosted by: Centre for 
Sustainability and Environmental Governance at Queen’s University Belfast; the 
Edinburgh Centre for Carbon Innovation; the University of Leeds, and the London 
School of Economics and Political Science  (2017) https://pcancities.org.uk/find -your-
place   
 
How to price carbon  to reach net -zero emissions in the UK  (2019) London School of 
Economics and Political Science et al. http://www.lse.ac.uk/GranthamInstitute/wp -
content/uploads/2019/05/GRI_POLICY -REPORT_How -to-price -carbon -to-reach -net-
zero-emissions -in-the-UK.pdf   
 
The S tate of Nature Report (State of Nature Partnership , 2019 ) 
https://nbn.org.uk/wp -content/uploads/2019/09/State -of-Nature -2019 -UK-full-
report.pdf  
 
The Inter governmental Science -Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem 
Services : Global Assessment Report on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services  
(IPBES , 2019) https: //www.ipbes.net/global -assessment -report -biodiversity -
ecosystem -services  
 
A toolkit for city regions and  local authorities  (Ashden, 2019) 
https://www.ashden.org/downloads/files/CAC -Chapters -all-FINAL.pdf   
 
Leading on Clean Growth: The Government Response to the Committee on Climate 
Change’s 2019 Progress Report to Parliament – Reducing UK Emissions (BEIS, 
2019)  
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/att ach
ment_data/file/839555/CCS0819884374 -
001_Government_Response_to_the_CCC_Progress_Report_2019_Web_Accessibl
e.pdf  
 
Environment Bill 2019 ( Department for Environment, Food & Rural Affairs , 2019)  
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/environment -bill-2019  
 38 
 
 Ice sheet contributions to future sea -level rise from structured expert judgment  
Jonathan L. Bamber  (PNAS, 2019)  https://www.pnas.org/content/116/23/11195  
 
Operation Icebridge (NASA, 2019) https://climate.nasa.gov/news/2883/study -
predicts -more -long-term-sea-level-rise-from-greenland -ice/  
Local Authority Climate Emergency Declarations (APSE, 2019)  
https://www.apse.org.uk/apse/index.cfm/local -authority -energy -collaboration/apse -
energy -publications1/local -authority -climate -emergency -declarations/   
 