Climate Change 
Strategy 
2021 – 2030The climate crisis is one of the 
most significant issues to face 
our society, our environment and 
the planet. A global response 
is required to tackle it, at an 
international, national and local 
level - its down to every individual. 
What happens next is up to us  
and we all need to play our part  
to manage our impact on Earth.We declared a climate emergency in 2019 to 
build on and step up the work the Council has 
already undertaken to reduce greenhouse gases 
and adapt to a changing climate.
Since the motion at full Council we have been 
working with representatives from the community 
to develop a new strategy and action plan 
building on our previous strategy.
We must all now take every action possible to 
prevent local and global changes to the climate 
before it is too late, we are at the tipping point 
and it is everyone’s responsibility to do whatever 
they can to help protect our precious planet for 
generations to come.
As a Local Authority we need to change the way 
we deliver our services, as well as working in 
partnership with local organisations, partners and 
the wider community to minimise our District’s 
environmental impact by reducing waste, carbon 
and pollution.Foreword
Councillor Wendy Schmitt,  
Cabinet Member for  
Environment
A public engagement exercise 
was carried out between May 
and July 2021, to hear the views 
of residents, businesses and 
stakeholders on our draft Climate 
Change Strategy.
 
Different engagement techniques were used 
to broaden the responses and feedback and 
to encourage people to participate in the 
engagement in a way that suited them.
An online survey asked direct questions about 
the themes and priorities, and a simulator asked 
people to apply scorings to approaches, which 
were weighted according to how much they 
would contribute to an overall reduction in carbon 
emissions.Face to face engagement allowed more in 
depth conversations to better understand views, 
behaviours and barriers to tackling climate 
change and engagement with schools helped 
us to understand the thoughts and views of our 
younger generation.
It was clear from all of the feedback received that 
people’s awareness of climate change is high. It 
is also clear that the majority of our respondents 
did feel that we can all do more to tackle climate 
change and there were a number of differing 
views as to the best way to do this.
In developing the updated strategy, we have 
taken all of these views into account and tried 
to reflect the breadth of views that have been 
expressed through the engagement process. We 
have made changes to the themes and priorities 
and strengthened the commentary throughout 
the strategy. Our Action Plan has also been 
developed taking into account the feedback 
received.Feedback from  
public engagement4   CLIMATE CHANGE STRATEGYOur climate is changing, we have 
seen a rapid rise in greenhouse 
gas emissions and a trend 
towards increasing global average 
temperatures over the last century. 
As a result of the temperature 
increases, climatic events are 
increasing in severity, strength 
and regularity. The intensity 
and frequency of storms and 
rainfall, flooding and heatwaves is 
increasing.
 
Global temperatures are projected to continue 
rising, which is very likely to cause continued 
changes in weather patterns, rising sea levels 
and increased frequency and intensity of extreme 
weather events. These changes are reflected 
in the UK recorded temperatures, which are 
illustrated in the graph below.As a result of this weather, seasons will become 
more variable with summers becoming hotter and 
drier, creating drought conditions with implications 
for growing crops and food and pressure on water 
supplies, milder and wetter autumn and winters, 
increasing flooding.
Changes to our climate will affect parts of our 
community and economy in different ways. 
For example, flooding may force residents and 
businesses out of their homes and premises or 
affect highways causing travel disruption.
The rural economy, including local agriculture may 
experience an impact on food yields and require 
different crop choices in our District.
There may also be less obvious indirect impacts 
on utilities. Power outages from increased storms 
could affect businesses, households and public 
services alike, causing disruption.
Throughout Earth’s history the climate has always 
changed, with ecosystems and species coming 
and going. However, rapid climate change affects 
the ability of ecosystems and species to adapt 
and so biodiversity loss increases. Plant and 
animal species must either adapt or migrate to 
areas with more favourable habitats, and in some 
cases are lost altogether. Even small changes 
in average temperatures can have a 
significant effect upon ecosystems. 
In 2015 the UK government joined 
195 others from around the world 
and signed the Paris Agreement. 
The Agreement legally ratified a 
commitment to prevent average global 
temperature  increasing by no more 
than 1.5 °C. In addition to the global 
agreement, the UK Government 
amended the Climate Change Act 
2008 with a binding target of ‘net zero’ 
emissions by 2050.Introduction
CLIMATE CHANGE STRATEGY  5   The emerging Environment Bill 2020 sets out 
some of the policy changes that the government 
is seeking to make to support the UK’s climate 
change objectives. This has been extensively 
consulted on but has been introduced to 
government during a period of significant change 
and uncertainty through the Covid-19 pandemic. 
There has been a delay in the progress of 
this Bill through parliament, and it is currently 
programmed for progression in Parliament in late 
2021.
The pandemic has also had a significant impact 
on society and it is not yet clear what the long 
term implications of this will be on travel, working 
styles, consumer behaviour and choices, housing 
and wider public priorities. This is a developing 
picture at a national level and it is likely to affect 
where the most positive environmental impacts 
can be made.
Braintree District Council declared a Climate 
Change Emergency in July 2019 and announced 
a target to be carbon neutral as a Council by 
2030, as well as supporting our communities to 
reduce the impacts of climate change across the 
Braintree District.Building on our first strategy dated 2015, the 
Council has taken a different approach to 
developing this strategy, with more of an external 
District wide focus to enable all of us across the 
District to contribute towards its aims, objectives 
and actions. A Climate Change Working Group 
with people from our communities, businesses 
and the voluntary sector was established to 
influence and contribute to shaping the key 
elements of the strategy and the Action Plan.
The group recognised the need to embrace 
national and local plans e.g. Environment Bill 
2020 and Essex Climate Action Commission 
and that with a flexible and partnership 
approach we can make the best use of our 
collective resources and data. The delay to the 
Environment Bill means that rather than the Bill 
informing the District strategy as was originally 
intended, we had to consult on the strategy 
based on our assumptions of the outcomes of 
the Bill, where possible, and we will review when 
the Bill has been agreed.
This strategy sets out the direction of travel to 
becoming carbon neutral by 2030. It will need to 
be reviewed and adapted over this time as the 
national and international agenda evolves. The 
strategy has also been developed to complement 
existing and emerging strategies that have 
significant overlap, including the Local Plan, 
District Growth Strategy, Corporate Strategy and 
Cycling Strategy.
6   CLIMATE CHANGE STRATEGYCLIMATE CHANGE STRATEGY  7   
Since 2005, domestic and 
commercial carbon emissions 
have reduced in the District due to 
changes in vehicle fuel efficiency, 
domestic insulation, heating 
and lighting, energy efficiency 
improvements to industrial 
processes and the introduction of 
renewable energy.
The make-up of our Carbon emissions gives 
us an understanding of where attention 
needs to be focussed to make the biggest 
impact.  District wide sources of Carbon 
Dioxide emissions (KT CO 2)
The Government produces area based  
CO 2 emissions measured in Kilo Tonnes (Kt).  
This pie chart and graph show that in the 
Braintree District, in order to reach net zero 
carbon emissions by 2030, there would need to 
be a reduction of 576Kt of CO 2.  
Please see breakdown below.Progress on reducing carbon  
emissions and adapting to  
climate change
Industry and 
Commerc ial
Residentia l
Transpor tAgriculture
105Kt
317Kt142Kt12Kt
360
270
180
90
0
2006
Transport Total Domestic TotalIndustry and  
Commercial Total
2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2005Levels of carbon dioxide emissions  
in our District (KT CO 2) since 2005As part of the previous Climate Change Strategy and emission reduction targets, the Council has also 
recorded its own direct emissions those created from the energy it consumes and indirect emissions. 
Since 2005, the Council has reduced its own emissions from 6455 tonnes down to 3281 tonnes CO 2 
per annum, and we aim for our Council activities to be carbon neutral by 2030.
To date we have delivered, and worked with others to deliver a range of initiatives and projects to 
mitigate the impacts of climate change across the District and reduce carbon emissions. Some of 
these achievements of this are set out below.
   Energy  
  Conservation
• Installed 8,700 energy saving  
 measures including boilers, domestic  
 solar installations, cavity wall and loft  
 installation resulting in 1,000 tonnes  
 of carbon saved.
• 14,689 residents registered for energy  
 switching to green tariffs resulting in  
 710 tonnes of carbon saved
  Transport
• Installed electric car chargers in  
 car parks across the District.
• Cycle scheme - 70 participants  
 purchased bikes through the scheme.
• Provision of secure bike storage at  
 Causeway House and Lakes Road.
• Provision of electric bike for staff use.
• Since 2015 we have saved 858  
 tonnes of CO 2 in business travel.  Council Assets  
  and Operations
• 0.5MW solar panels installed on  
 local authority owned buildings  
 generating £100k/pa combined  
 income and saving.
• Installed 30 secondary double  
 glazed units, replaced 150 light bulbs  
 and replaced gas boiler with an A  
 rated replacement at Grade 2* listed  
 Town Hall saving 15 tonnes of CO 2  
 emissions since 2014.
• Total Household Waste collected  
 2010-2020 571,455 tonnes.
• Total Household Waste recycled  
 2010-2020 301,939 tonnes.
• Total Percentage recycled  
 2010-2020 52.84%.
8   CLIMATE CHANGE STRATEGYCLIMATE CHANGE STRATEGY  9   
  Natural 
  Environment
• Flood alleviation schemes – Foxearth,  
 Steeple Bumpstead, Williams Drive -  
 Braintree, Forest Road - Witham.
• Habitat creation and improvements  
 to increase biodiversity in BDC  
 woodlands and local nature reserves  
 and open spaces– Hoppit Mead,  
 Bocking Blackwater, Cuckoo Wood,  
 Coggeshall Pieces and Halstead  
 River Walk
• Continuous tree, bulb and hedge  
 planting across the District, including  
 the Millennium and Jubilee Oaks  
 projects, Bee Friendly Plant  
 Giveaway, community tree planting  
 projects, urban tree planting projects  
 and support for the Essex Forest  
 project and Essex Forest schools  Education, engagement  
  and encouraging  
  behavioural change
• Within our offices, stopped use of  
 22,000 single use plastic cups per  
 year and reduced paper consumption.
• Provided educational talks to schools  
 on waste and recycling
• Delivered
 • ‘Shop local’ and ‘click it local’  
  campaigns to encourage people  
  to shop more locally, support local  
  businesses and reduce carbon  
  footprint
 • ‘Say no to plastic’ campaign to  
  encourage people to reuse plastic  
  and opt for items without plastic  
  packaging when shopping
 • Love Essex Plastic Pledge – 2,067  
  households signed up to take the  
  pledge to reduce their reliance on  
  single use plastic
 • Various littering campaigns to  
  reduce the amount of car litter,  
  fly tips, dog fouling, littering in  
  parks and open spaces by  
  highlighting fines given out for litter  
  offences
 • Love food, hate waste campaigns  
  providing food tips to keep food  
  fresher, lasting longer and saving it  
  from going in the bin
 • Winter Warmth campaigns to  
  ensure vulnerable people stay  
  safe, well and warm during the  
  colder months
• Provided an electrical items recycling  
 service, historically through library  
 collections and more recently through  
 kerbside bulky waste collections
• Promoted Freegle to encourage  
 reuse of items instead of throwing  
 them away  Resources
• Since 2005 1,252 tonnes of CO 2  
 have been saved through the  
 reduction of our gas consumption.
• Since 2005 600 tonnes of CO 2 have 
 been saved through the reduction  
 of our electricity use.10   CLIMATE CHANGE STRATEGY
  Business and the  
  Green Economy
• The LoCase programme has  
 supported 39 businesses in the  
 District receiving a total of  
 £238,021 to implement energy  
 efficiency measures.
• The Council collected 457 tonnes of  
 recycling from 363 local businesses  
 last year
• Supporting businesses to develop  
 Green Travel Plans
• Investment in I-Construct to provide  
 a regional centre for excellence in  
 innovation and construction   Adapting to  
  Climate Change
• Community risk – more than 50% of  
 parish Councils have developed  
 parish emergency plans.
• Emergency Planning – Multi-agency  
 flood plan. Emergency plans for  
 severe weather in place.
 The Climate Change Working 
Group recognises the role of the 
Council, the wider community and 
multiple partner organisations in 
delivering the objectives. Everyone 
has responsibilities and by working 
together our individual and 
collective contributions will help 
to mitigate the impacts of climate 
change.
Some members of the Climate Change Working 
Group have participated in the Essex Climate 
Action Commission and are monitoring progress 
of the Environment Bill 2020, as our strategy 
will need to align to these to ensure maximum 
impact. We have been mindful of this when 
considering our action plans for delivery.
An initial investment of £500k has been made 
by the District Council to support the delivery 
of this strategy. Individual business cases will 
be required to approve funding for the various 
projects, with some being delivered in conjunction 
with partners which will attract external/new 
funding opportunities. This District wide strategy 
recognises the important contribution that 
everyone can make including our partners, 
communities and businesses.Purpose of Strategy
Make Council 
activities carbon 
neutral as far  
as practical  
by 2030
Support  
partners, residents, 
and local businesses 
to achieve carbon 
neutrality by 2030 Build resilient 
communities  
that adapt to  
the impacts of  
climate changeTHE  
PURPOSE  
OF OUR  
STRATEGY  
IS TO:
CLIMATE CHANGE STRATEGY  11   Themes and Priorities
A number of themes have emerged through the development of this 
strategy and engagement with our communities. Each of these themes 
has key priorities that will support the delivery of our overall objectives 
which follows through to our initial action plan.
The key themes of the strategy are:
Transport Natural 
EnvironmentResources Energy 
Conservation
Adapting to 
Climate ChangeBuilt 
Environment
Business & the 
Green Economy12   CLIMATE CHANGE STRATEGYResources 
Priorities
We must reduce our impact on 
the world’s natural resources, with 
a focus on fair and sustainable 
production and consumption by 
reusing or repurposing where 
possible. We need to reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions caused 
by the production of goods and 
services and carefully manage the 
waste we produce.
Our current consumption patterns should 
be reduced and adapted, particularly our 
consumption of carbon-intensive products and 
activities and to re-use and repair items we 
already have rather than replace them. Where carbon emissions cannot be completely 
eliminated, viable offsetting alternatives need to 
be available for organisations and businesses to 
support them to reduce their emissions to zero. 
The Council can play an active role in facilitating 
both access to carbon offsetting and supporting 
the development of local offsetting businesses. 
In the transition to the low carbon economy the 
Council must play an active role in supporting 
local food producers and local material/product 
manufacturers. Residents and businesses should 
have more opportunities and be encouraged to 
source local products and to reduce their need 
to purchase products with single use packaging 
where possible. 
As a waste collection authority, our role in the 
reduce, reuse and recycling of materials gives 
us the opportunity to support consumers and 
businesses to make better choices about their 
purchasing and disposal options and this needs 
to form a core part of our engagement plan. 
Whilst the Council has control of the collection 
of waste, responsibility for disposal is Essex 
County Council’s (Waste Disposal Authority). 
As members of the Essex Waste Management 
Partnership Board we will continue to work 
with them and other Councils across Essex to 
encourage the most environmentally sustainable 
options for the future processing and treatment of 
residual waste. 
There will be changes to the way that that 
resources and waste are managed through the 
Environment Bill and this needs to be monitored 
over the months ahead to ensure speedy and 
effective implementation of the relevant parts of 
the Bill when it is passed.REDUCE WASTE,  
INCREASE 
RECYCLINGREDUCE 
USE OF NON 
RENEWABLE 
MATERIALSCONSERVE 
OUR NATURAL 
RESOURCESCLIMATE CHANGE STRATEGY  13   14   CLIMATE CHANGE STRATEGY
The energy we use has a 
significant impact on our 
environment. Fossil fuels are non-
renewable and the burning of 
fossil fuels releases carbon dioxide 
and other gases into the air. This 
causes visible issues such as 
pollution as well as contributing 
towards global warming. Energy 
conservation is something that 
everyone can contribute to by 
limiting the amount of energy that 
they use as well as ensuring that 
as much of that energy as possible 
is derived from renewable sources.
Heating buildings and hot water currently 
accounts for nearly 25% of District wide carbon 
emissions. At least 65% of this heat is supplied by 
gas, 25% from oil and about 10% from electricity 
(including storage heating). Since 2005 Braintree District Council has halved 
its own carbon emissions from 6455 tonnes 
down to 3281 tonnes CO 2 by upgrading the 
energy efficiency of its estate, policy change 
and investment in the delivery of services 
and introducing significant renewable solar 
technology on buildings and installing EV 
charging infrastructure across its sites. The 
Council continues to work to reduce emissions to 
zero and share best practice when trialling new 
green technology. 
To support our District to conserve energy, the 
Council must build on existing engagement 
programmes to actively support households, 
landlords and businesses in identifying and 
implementing practical ways to reduce energy 
used and find carbon neutral or reduced carbon 
alternatives for energy that is consumed. As 
alternative energy and energy efficient products 
move into the mainstream they are becoming 
more accessible and affordable making it easier 
to transition. 
Some initiatives will require engagement at a 
national level to ensure that regulations, powers 
and subsidy regimes are provided which support 
the phase out of fossil fuel energy. There will be 
a need to increase awareness and to encourage 
uptake of emerging technologies, supporting 
residents to access opportunities for funding. 
An increased reliance on the electricity network  
in the future will require local and national 
electricity structure to be upgraded and operated 
more smartly to serve higher demand. Local 
micro-generation and storage systems need to 
be better integrated to the grid, or permitted to 
operate independently to the grid to reduce cost 
and deployment friction and encourage uptake.Energy Conservation  
Priorities
IMPROVE 
ENERGY 
PERFORMANCE 
OF EXISTING 
HOUSINGINCREASE 
PROPORTION OF 
ENERGY FROM 
RENEWABLE 
SOURCESREDUCE ENERGY 
USE & IMPROVE 
ENERGY EFFICIENT 
INFRASTRUCTURECLIMATE CHANGE STRATEGY  15   
Built Environment 
Priorities
Reducing the carbon impact of our 
homes and ensuring that future 
communities are sustainable 
will be a major contributor to the 
reduction of our impact on the 
climate. Communities need to be 
designed to fit in with and enhance 
the environment, whilst creating a 
good place to live and improving the 
health and wellbeing of residents.
 
Between 2013 and 2033 the District must build 
over 14,000 new homes, and the locations 
for these can be found in the new Local Plan. 
When the Environment Bill is enacted, it is 
likely that there will be a requirement for all new 
developments to deliver a Biodiversity Net Gain 
of 110%. 
One of the biggest priorities in the emerging Local 
Plan is the position of development. Locating 
this within walking and cycling distance of new 
infrastructure networks will enable residents to 
meet their everyday needs without long journeys. Retrofitting our existing homes will ensure our 
current buildings will have better energy and 
water performance, cutting water and heating 
demand and therefore carbon, and will support 
the target to eliminate fuel poverty and end the 
risk of anyone having to live in a cold home. 
Engagement will be required with housing 
developers, households and businesses across 
the District to develop an awareness and 
understanding of modern construction, planning 
considerations and the implications of the new 
planning reforms. A particular focus will be 
required on those experiencing fuel poverty, 
with tailored support services and funding 
opportunities identified for home upgrades. 
Planning functions are a key lever in reducing 
emissions and adapting localities to a changing 
climate. We will make use of our planning and 
building powers to require higher energy efficient 
standards and design standards in new builds 
and extensions, where we are allowed to do so 
through national policy.
It will be important to engage and influence 
Government on the introduction of powers and 
regulations to drive high energy efficiency, water 
efficiency and climate resilience standards for 
existing buildings, supporting improvements in 
the domestic and non-domestic private rented 
sectors. 
As a Council, we need to continue to respond to 
changes which could impact our environment, 
but which are outside of our control.  The Council 
shares some of the concerns of residents about 
the new incinerator being built in the District 
and it’s potential carbon contribution. Whilst it 
has no direct control over the plans to build the 
incinerator, Braintree District Council will continue 
to engage on behalf of residents with the site 
owner, with Essex County Council as the Waste 
Disposal Authority and the Environment Agency 
to ensure that the site is built and operated within 
its permitted limits. REDUCE HOUSEHOLD  
WATER CONSUMPTION AND 
MAXIMISE INSTALLATION 
OF SUSTAINABLE DRAINAGE 
SYSTEMS, WATER REUSE AND 
GREY WATER HARVESTING  
TECHNOLOGIESREDUCE ENERGY  
USE IN EXISTING 
HOUSING BY  
RETROFITTING  
ENERGY  
EFFICIENCY  
MEASURESREDUCE THE 
CARBON IMPACT 
AND IMPROVE 
BIODIVERSITY 
OF NEW  
DEVELOPMENTSCurrently 47% of the District’s 
carbon emissions are transport 
related. The number of vehicles 
on the roads needs to reduce, 
with more people using public 
transport, walking and cycling 
instead of using private cars. This 
would positively impact peoples’ 
health and provides an opportunity 
to minimise emissions, reduce 
congestion and improve local air 
quality.
Public transport needs to be accessible, reliable, 
safe and affordable to encourage greater use. 
Modal change hubs where the public switch 
from one form of transport to another need to be 
accessible. Although Braintree District Council 
is not responsible for highways or transport, we 
will work with Essex County Council to transform 
our infrastructure in favour of active transport. 
We also need to support Government plans to 
phase out petrol and diesel powered vehicles, converting to electric for most vehicles and 
biogas or hydrogen for some larger vehicles 
like buses, lorries, tractors and other plant. A 
significant electric vehicle charging infrastructure 
will be required across the District and being the 
District with the first all-electric forecourt in the 
country, we have a good example of what can 
be achieved. We will also need an extensive 
cycle/walking network that is easy to use and our 
cycling strategy will set out how we plan to create 
cycling networks in both rural and urban areas, 
secure funding and promote cycling.
Locating sustainable transport facilities near to 
work and homes will increase the opportunity for 
people to choose alternative means of travel to 
a private car. Increasing the ability for people to 
work from home on a long term basis will reduce 
the need for journeys.
This climate change strategy is aligned with our 
cycling strategy, which seeks to make Braintree 
a leader in cycling provision, to make it safer and 
more attractive for a greater number of people to 
cycle more frequently.
We know that our transport system is vulnerable 
to future climate change flood events, as well as 
impacts of high temperatures, through melting 
tarmac or contorted railway tracks. By its nature, 
transport is a cross-boundary issue and we will 
need to work with other statutory undertakers 
and providers to reduce carbon emissions from 
transport, as well as mitigate the impacts of 
climate change on our transport infrastructure.ENCOURAGE 
GREENER 
TRANSPORT 
CHOICESTransport  
Priorities
GROW ELECTRIC 
VEHICLE CHARGING 
NETWORK AND IN-
FRASTRUCTUREINCREASE 
CYCLING AND 
WALKING IN 
THE DISTRICT
IMPROVE DIGITAL  
CONNECTIVITY  
TO REDUCE  
WORK TRAVEL  
DEMAND16   CLIMATE CHANGE STRATEGYCLIMATE CHANGE STRATEGY  17   
Business & the Green Economy  
Priorities
The UK’s commitment to net 
zero emissions by 2050 will 
increase demand for low carbon 
environmental goods and services, 
both within the District and beyond 
and will also require businesses to 
reduce their carbon footprint. This 
area of growth in the green sector 
has the potential to enhance the 
local economy. The Council has 
an essential role in creating the 
conditions for growth and attracting 
sustainable, environmentally 
responsible low carbon businesses 
and skilled workers to the District.The continued growth of a cross cutting green 
technology sector is one which the Council will 
seek to facilitate. We will support green projects 
for inward investment, attract grant funding and 
capitalize on green growth opportunities across 
all industry sectors, from house-building and 
infrastructure to low carbon technology, as well 
as setting an example through the commercial 
buildings we own and operate, sharing our 
expertise and knowledge with local businesses. 
I-Construct is a regional centre for excellence 
in innovation in construction and is the first part 
of that programme. It will support the District’s 
important construction and infrastructure 
sector to share innovations and showcase new 
construction processes and products, provide 
training opportunities to upgrade knowledge and 
skills and share best practice across the sector. 
We will work with partners to ensure the impact 
of this project and other similar schemes is 
maximised for our businesses. 
With almost a third of carbon emissions 
coming from heating there will need to be 
engagement with low carbon generation and 
heating businesses to promote the District as an 
attractive operating environment with favourable 
opportunities for product development and trade. 
We will work with key local partners and 
businesses to support innovation and 
entrepreneurship and the sharing of technical 
knowledge, foster partnerships, offer incentives 
and support for local businesses to operate on 
a sustainable model and commit to becoming 
carbon neutral. 
The Council has worked with businesses in the 
past to access grant schemes that help them 
become more efficient and carbon neutral and will 
continue to work with businesses to access these 
national or regional schemes. ENCOURAGE  
BUSINESSES  
TO REDUCE  
ENERGY USEENCOURAGE 
BUSINESSES  
TO REDUCE 
WASTEDEVELOP  
OUR GREEN  
ECONOMY
ENCOURAGE 
BUSINESSES  
TO BUILD  
RESILIENCE18   CLIMATE CHANGE STRATEGY
Training will be needed to support new 
technology implementation. There is an 
opportunity to work with training providers, 
businesses and further education establishments 
to increase skills and attract businesses 
associated with this sector into the District. 
Whilst it may not currently be possible for all 
organisations to eliminate 100% of carbon 
emissions, this can be supplemented by high 
quality and verifiable carbon offsetting. This is 
an area that the Council could provide a role 
in facilitating between those organisations who 
want to invest in offsetting measures and those 
who have schemes and projects that provide an 
offsetting opportunity. This could also help develop new low-carbon 
income streams for carbon positive rural 
businesses that can offer surplus carbon credits 
generated from carbon sequestration* (e.g. 
following tree planting or land use activities) 
whilst also assisting local firms with unavoidable 
emissions to achieve net zero. Offsets trading 
should be considered as an interim measure, 
as by 2050 it is anticipated that the necessity 
for carbon trading falls to a low level due to 
technological advances allowing significant 
reductions in ‘unavoidable’ emissions. 
*Carbon sequestration - is the long-term removal, 
capture or sequestration of carbon dioxide from 
the atmosphere to slow or reverse atmospheric 
CO 2 pollution and to mitigate global warming.Natural Environment  
Priorities
 
Protecting the natural environment 
is a priority that will not only 
deliver benefits for climate change 
but will also impact positively 
on the physical and emotional 
health and wellbeing of residents. 
Access to green open spaces 
has been continually identified by 
our residents as one of their key 
priorities in making the District a 
good place to live.
Developing, protecting and enhancing green 
infrastructure and the natural environment will 
also help protect urban and rural environments 
against the impacts of climate change. Amongst 
other things, it will help improve surface drainage, 
reducing flood risk, storing and cleaning water 
and reducing the urban heat island effect. By 
planting more trees and increasing canopy cover, 
not only will we create an improvement in our 
green spaces, we will also create an opportunity 
to capture and store carbon.Climate change can spread pests, diseases and 
non-native invasive species so biological and 
environmental diversity provides a degree of 
resilience for natural systems. 
We all need to limit the damage caused to natural 
habitats and wildlife by climate change, whilst 
also supporting opportunities for recovery and 
protection of species. Developing our blue and 
green infrastructure and increasing the network of 
natural and semi-natural areas across the District, 
will increase the range of ecosystems in both 
rural and urban settings. The Local Plan sets out 
the allocation and protection of a range of open 
spaces and important natural features to support 
this priority, as well as how we can adapt our blue 
and green infrastructure to support the natural 
environment. 
Gardens form a significant part of our natural 
environment and residents can make changes in 
their gardens, which collectively can make a large 
impact on biodiversity. 
We will build on the already strong network of 
volunteers including our Green Heart Champions, 
Friends of groups, volunteer tree wardens and 
community groups, identifying Climate Change 
Ambassadors and working with these individuals 
and groups to support them to make a difference 
to the place they live, enabling and empowering 
everyone to play their part. 
Existing and new partnerships can support the 
implementation of changes to enhance our 
natural environment and help to implement the 
outcomes of the Environment Bill 2020, including 
any around Biodiversity Net Gain.IMPROVE 
WATER 
QUALITY, FLOOD 
RESILIENCE 
AND HABITATINCREASE TREE 
AND SHRUB 
PLANTINGIMPROVE  
BIODIVERSITY 
AND GREEN 
SPACES
IMPROVE AIR 
QUALITYCLIMATE CHANGE STRATEGY  19   
Adapting to Climate Change  
Priorities
Whilst the majority of our Climate 
Change Strategy focusses on 
mitigating our impact on the 
climate, we know that the climate 
is already changing and residents 
and businesses need support to 
adapt to this change.
In our Emergency and Resilience Planning 
role, we have a direct responsibility to consider 
how we can support and work with all of our 
communities. We will build community resilience 
through supporting behaviour change and 
partnership working. Communities should feel empowered to take action, understanding the 
part they play and inspiring people to develop 
the skills they need to lead on initiatives. A 
number of Parish and Town Councils have their 
own emergency plans to plan for and respond 
to events, and homeowners have put their own 
mitigation measures in place. We will need to 
continue to provide emergency planning advice 
and support to Town/Parish Councils with their 
own emergency plans.
Flooding has become an increased risk that our 
communities face and it is important to continue 
working with the lead flooding agencies, to 
ensure that communities are protected from 
flooding as much as possible. As a Council, we 
will work with partners to ensure that the District 
becomes resilient to flooding through a variety of 
measures from large catchment flow schemes to 
sustainable drainage systems.
We recognise the role that the changing climate 
plays on health issues, from the impact of 
heatwaves to increases in diseases and the 
stress caused by flood damage to homes and 
businesses. There is also a risk that climate 
change will impact disproportionately on the most 
vulnerable in our society, increasing inequalities. 
This can include long term health impacts and 
fuel poverty. We will continue to develop our 
understanding of the health impacts of climate 
change and work with partners through our 
Health and Wellbeing panel to respond to these.
Essex Resilience Forum and other community 
based partnerships will enable more efficient use 
of resources and will increase resilience enabling 
us to protect services for the most vulnerable.MAINTAIN 
EMERGENCY 
PLANS FOR 
THE DISTRICTIMPROVE FLOOD 
ALLEVIATION FOR 
COMMUNITY AREAS 
THAT FLOOD
PREVENT THE 
IMPACTS OF 
CLIMATE CHANGE 
DISPROPORTIONATELY 
HARMING THE MOST 
VULNERABLEINCREASE 
DROUGHT 
MITIGATION 
FOR THE 
DISTRICT
SUPPORT 
BUSINESS AND 
COMMUNITIES 
TO IMPROVE 
RESILIENCE20   CLIMATE CHANGE STRATEGYDelivering the strategy
This strategy sets out the 
community wide shared 
priorities for almost a decade of 
transformative climate action.
Braintree District Council, along with our Climate 
Change Working Group and the Essex Climate 
Action Commission are bringing partners together 
to provide collective leadership on climate 
change.
Many people and businesses are already taking 
action individually, in communities or through 
various networks. This will need to continue 
and scale up. People’s individual actions are 
extremely important, both in direct emissions 
reduction and in bringing about the changes we 
need to achieve our goals.In order to maintain governance, accountability, 
support and coordination within wider networks, 
Braintree District Council, and the Climate 
Change Working Group will continue to provide 
direction and maintain an overview of the delivery 
of the strategy. They will also contribute to and 
support the ongoing development of the Action 
Plan. In respect of those actions to be delivered 
by others, including our partners, it is essential 
there are sufficient staff and financial 
resources available to deliver actions.
The pace and scale of change for us 
to deliver the aims and objectives 
of this strategy by 2030 requires 
a step change to the previous 
work undertaken by the Council 
and its partners, as well as our 
communities.
The following conditions for 
change have been highlighted 
throughout our strategy and will 
need to be developed to ensure 
successful delivery of our objectivesENGAGEMENT
INFRASTRUCTURE
DATA
SKILLSWORKING  
TOGETHERFUNDING
CONDITIONS 
FOR CHANGE
CLIMATE CHANGE STRATEGY  21   Engagement
Many people are already taking action as 
individuals and communities, and they support 
changes which would help them to reduce 
carbon emissions. We need to continue to 
support our communities to engage, feel 
empowered and to have the tools, capacity and 
the opportunity to contribute to the overall climate 
change objectives.
To ensure that the changes are fair and 
socially encompassing, unintended negative 
consequences must be minimised so that 
change is accessible and possible for all.
In order to support and enable further individual 
and community action, development of a 
communication and engagement plan with buy-
in from all delivery partners will be essential. 
This must include plans to ensure that we 
reflect the views of a wide range of groups. We 
will also develop approaches to engage with 
harder to reach groups and our urban and rural 
communities.
Much work has already taken 
place at individual and community 
level. We will work with all 
partners who have declared, or 
want to declare, a climate emergency or made 
public climate change commitments, supporting 
them to develop plans.Funding
To achieve the objectives of this 
strategy, substantial investment will be needed 
at an international, national and local level, 
particularly in relation to infrastructure projects 
and long term programmes, such as the move 
away from fossil fuel heating systems and 
investment in sustainable transport solutions.
Expenditure in carbon reduction can often deliver 
savings, which will help to demonstrate effective 
business cases for change. As a District Council, 
we can seek out and identify innovative and 
collaborative ways to finance climate change 
programmes and support partners who require 
investment to realise projects that will contribute 
towards objectives. More widely, people and 
businesses across the District can influence 
funding through personal spending choices 
and collectively there will be a need to engage 
nationally with government and business to 
support wide scale investment into the green 
economy.
Working Together
To ensure that we can make the maximum 
impact, we all need to work together. We will 
need to deliver our own actions, whilst engaging 
at a local level with residents, businesses, 
community groups and others to ensure that they 
feel empowered and able to play their part. At the 
same time, we will all need to influence others at 
a local and national level to create the right laws, 
policies and programmes that support this.
The climate change response is happening 
alongside other key priorities in the District that 
need to be delivered, including sustainable 
economic growth, community resilience and 
connectivity. This strategy needs to address the 
interconnectivity of these priorities and seek to 
find ways to achieve the combined objectives.
To achieve a fair transition and make change 
affordable for all we will need systemic market 
changes. This will require barriers to change 
to be addressed and initiate a shift in favour of 
climate mitigation and adaptation 
interventions.  22   CLIMATE CHANGE STRATEGYCLIMATE CHANGE STRATEGY  23   
Skills
The Green economy creates a 
great opportunity to increase 
employment. We need to support 
everyone to be able to make choices which 
reduce carbon emissions or increase climate 
resilience. We also need to transform the way 
in which our decisions are made, empowering 
everyone with the skills, knowledge and capacity 
to support the implementation of climate friendly 
initiatives.
In particular, we recognise that the skills and 
capacity in the construction industry to deliver the 
scale and pace required. We need to make sure 
we support the uptake of solutions that support 
our local economy and businesses.
We need the right skills and resources. We also 
need to enable effective ways of connecting our 
skilled workforce with those with a demand for 
skills. To do this we will seek out and support 
innovation and share best practice with wider 
networks, emphasising the importance of 
investment in schemes like I-Construct. It will 
also be important to link with Further Education 
providers, including Colchester Institute who are 
likely to deliver much of the training required in 
the construction and technology sector.
We need to integrate training and the 
requirements for carbon neutral and climate 
resilient related knowledge into Further 
Education, apprenticeships and job roles across 
all of our priority areas. There will also be a need 
for ongoing carbon literacy training for local 
authority officers and staff in other organisations 
to ensure that those delivering services and 
taking decisions have the most up to date 
knowledge and information to support them to 
understand the climate impact of their services.Data
Evidence and validation will 
be required to develop our 
action plans, ensuring that we 
invest in the most effective actions to achieve 
carbon neutrality and climate resilience. Without 
good data we cannot be sure we are focusing 
on the key issues and it is difficult to measure 
our progress. Therefore we need to establish 
baselines and set targets to allow monitoring and 
evaluation to take place.
Some of the national data has a significant 
time lag until we receive it, which will require 
us to identify other data sources to support our 
monitoring and decision making.
We want to be able to share knowledge and 
data with other local authorities and partner 
organisations to share our understanding and 
learning from both successes and opportunities 
for improvement. Given the urgency of the 
challenge, we need to work with our current data 
and evidence, then adapt our approach as we 
learn more. For some priorities we have good 
data and knowledge about the challenge and 
the actions which are needed, others we need to 
explore more.
We need to make sure we have the right data 
and information to support the decisions that 
will support action. We also need to know 
more about regional climate scenarios so that 
we can plan using the most up to date climate 
projections. A key priority to support the delivery 
of this strategy will be development of an impact 
assessment tool to identify, capture, monitor 
and report the impacts of climate change in our 
District.Infrastructure
Successful delivery of the strategy will be reliant 
on infrastructure. The way that infrastructure is 
managed and maintained will be important in 
mitigating and adapting to climate change.
Aligned to this, will be investment in new 
or updated infrastructure, in terms of heat, 
electricity and transport, to meet our strategic 
goals. Walking, cycling and public transport 
infrastructure, as well as charging infrastructure 
for electric vehicles, or other zero carbon fuels 
will support a number of priorities set out in  
the strategy.
Infrastructure can protect homes and businesses 
from flooding. This includes grey infrastructure, 
such as flood walls and rain water storage, but 
also where natural solutions such as leaky dams 
and reinstated flood plains could be implemented 
to support flood protection while providing urban 
cooling, environmental and health and wellbeing 
benefits. We will need to develop our ICT and 
communications infrastructure to enable the use 
of technologies.We will need to support UKPN to 
understand future local demand 
for electricity and to develop a 
clear plan for investing in upgrades 
required to the electricity distribution 
grid. Continued engagement with ECC and 
Environment Agency on flood defence projects, 
development with ECC of countywide plan for 
electric vehicle charging and hydrogen refuelling 
infrastructure will be important. We will also 
need to continue to work with developers to 
implement flood mitigation technology and green 
infrastructure in developments.24   CLIMATE CHANGE STRATEGYAction Plan
The action plan has been informed by the 
engagement process for the strategy. It will 
build on the reductions in District emissions that 
have already been achieved in partnership with 
Government, regional agencies, local businesses, 
organisations and communities and residents.
The action plan sets out work stream actions by 
Braintree District Council and partners, including 
work by community groups and will be regularly 
reviewed to stay abreast of changes in emissions, 
external influences such as national policy and 
legislation, and the measures available.
The initial plan will have projects and initiatives to 
deliver wider sustainable development, provide 
sustainable transport infrastructure, improve 
air quality, protect biodiversity and habitats and 
promote and improve environmental stewardship, 
reduce fuel poverty and improve the standard of 
housing.
The action plan will be a living document. We will 
revise our plans as the climate and environmental 
emergency develops, targets are met, funding 
becomes available and new technologies 
emerge.At this stage, the carbon impact of delivering the 
actions has not been fully quantified. Further, 
detailed work is required in order to produce a 
more definite assessment of the carbon reduction 
of each action in the plan. In an attempt to 
provide a high-level estimation, a carbon impact 
scale has been incorporated into the plan. This 
method will help identifying those actions that 
are likely to have the highest carbon reduction 
contribution and also those actions that will be 
more complex to quantify for various reasons. 
The carbon impact will be updated with specific 
figures as and when further work is undertaken 
and they can be calculated more accurately. 
Actions have been separated out into short, 
medium and longer term as well as ongoing 
actions throughout the life of the strategy.
Actions will link into other strategies including 
the District Growth Strategy and further develop 
the green economy in the District through the 
development of new green sector skills and jobs, 
and will link to our Livewell programme to improve 
health and adapt to the impacts of climate change 
with stronger, more resilient, communities.
Projects will be reviewed through a business case 
process to ensure value for money, significant 
carbon saving and ability to deliver sustainable 
change.CLIMATE CHANGE STRATEGY  25   26   CLIMATE CHANGE STRATEGY
Measuring and Monitoring
For the Council and the wider 
District to become zero carbon  
and climate resilient, progress  
must be measured.
Carbon emissions across the District are currently 
calculated each year by the Department for 
Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy who 
release local authority wide carbon emissions 
data (there is always a two-year lag in the 
publication of each year’s data e.g. 2020 data will 
not be published until 2022).
Therefore this strategy will require other outcome 
and output measures to monitor the success of 
interventions to determine which actions offer 
best value for money and provide the widest co-
benefits in a timely manner.
We already have an organisation baseline 
provided by the annual carbon reduction 
monitoring reports. The Council also maintains 
its Emergency and Business Continuity Plans. 
We will continue to monitor progress against this 
evidence base.
We will develop performance measures for 
mitigation and resilience action covering both 
outputs (what is delivered through actions) and 
outcomes (the difference made by the outputs).Some actions such as biodiversity improvement, 
adaptation measures or education engagement 
campaigns are essential to change behaviours 
and mind sets, but it is difficult to measure 
the direct contribution these make to reducing 
greenhouse gas emissions or improving the 
natural environment. For these interventions, 
qualitative outputs and outcomes will be a 
primary means of measurement.
CLIMATE CHANGE STRATEGY  27   
Date of publication, August 2021Braintree District Council  
Causeway House  
Braintree  
Essex CM7 HB
www.braintree.gov.uk  
csc@braintree.gov.uk 
01376 552525  