 
 
   
 
1 
 
Buckinghamshire Council 
Climate Change and Air 
Quality Strategy 
Last updated:  30 September 2021  
Version:  1 
 2 Contents  
Foreword ...............................................................................................1  
Executive Summary  ..............................................................................2  
Our Approach ........................................................................................3  
Previous and Current P rogress  .................................................................................. 4  
Developing this Strategy  ............................................................................................ 6  
Adaptation  .................................................................................................................. 7  
Policy and Regulatory Context  ............................................................9  
Clim ate Change  ................................................................................... 11 
The Global Challenge  ............................................................................................... 12 
Air Quality  ........................................................................................... 14 
Buckinghamshire Air Quality Management Areas (AQMAs)  .................................... 15 
Regulated Facilities  .................................................................................................. 15 
Evidence Base  .................................................................................... 17 
Global to Local Carbon Emissions 2018  .................................................................. 17 
Buckinghamshire Carbon Emissions  ........................................................................ 18 
Buckinghamshire Council’s Carbon Emissions  ........................................................ 20 
Air Quality Monitoring  ............................................................................................... 22 
Targets  ................................................................................................. 23 
First Carbon Budget  ................................................................................................. 23 
Air Quality  ................................................................................................................. 24 
Governance and Management  ................................................................................. 25 
The Council’s Emissions  ................................................................... 28 
Behaviour  ................................................................................................................. 29 
The Council’s Operational Estate  ............................................................................. 29 
Transport  .................................................................................................................. 31 3 Suppliers and Partners  ....................................................................... 33 
Partners  .................................................................................................................... 33 
Suppliers  .................................................................................................................. 35 
County -wide  ........................................................................................ 37 
Transportation  .......................................................................................................... 37 
Buildings and Developments  .................................................................................... 39 
Waste  ....................................................................................................................... 41 
Economy  .................................................................................................................. 41 
Environment, Land and Water  .................................................................................. 42 
Health and Communications  .................................................................................... 43 
Glossary  .............................................................................................. 46 
  
 
1 Foreword  
As a new unitary authority Buckinghamshire Council (established on 1 April 2020) has  
an opportunity to shape itself, the area it serves, and its rela tionships to improve the 
future for the environment and mankind. We are on a journey to transform local 
authority service provision to deliver against the key priorities set out in our Corporate 
Plan.  
Climate change and poor air quality are significant challenges to making 
Buckinghamshire the best place to live, raise a family, work and do business. They negatively  affect  human and ecological health, the economy and  the built environment . 
Every area of our lives, including the services provided by the council, are affected  by 
these issues. But all of us have the capacity to address them and make changes to 
reduce our emiss ions to air . 
We recognise the role we  play in helping Buckinghamshire mitigate and adapt  to a 
changing climate and air pollution. Actions taken so far include : installing solar 
photovoltaic systems, energy efficiency measures and electric vehicle charging points, 
flood risk management projects, and new walking and cycling routes . In addition, our 
Air Quality Action Plans detail measures to improve local air quality in areas where concentrations of air pollutants exceed legally binding limits.   
On 15 July 2020  we committed to working “alongside national Government with the 
objective to achieve net carbon zero for Buckinghamshire as a whole by 2050. The council should also evaluate reaching ‘net zero’ for its own emissions no later than 
2050 and possibly before this, potentially by 2030, subject to resources” . This 
document sets out the strategy for helping achieve national air quality objectives and zero carbon ambitions. It details over 60 actions  to address climate change and poor 
air quality regarding c ouncil operations , our work and contracts with partners and 
suppliers, and  how we influence activity county -wide.  
We look forward to working with you so th at all of us can tackle these environme ntal 
threats and ensure a sustainable future for Buckinghamshire.   
 
 
Peter Strachan  
2 Executive Summary 
Increasing concentrations of specific pollutants in the air due to human activity have 
given rise to climate change and poor air quality. Local authorities have a responsibility 
to ensure that concentrations of certain reactive gases and particulate matter are at 
safe levels, as set out in the National Air Quality Objectives . Air Quality Action Plans 
have been developed to tackle exceedances of nitrogen dioxide (NO 2) in 9 areas in 
Buckinghamshire.  
Major sources of pollutants affecting local air quality (e.g. transport) are also main 
sources of greenhouse gases (GHGs) in Buckinghamshire. GHGs trap radiation from 
the Sun causing our planet to warm. As levels of GHGs (or carbon emissions) 
increase, the Earth gets hotter – our climate changes. The effects of climate change 
on weather, biodiversity, food and water supplies, economy and health are being felt now.  
Against the motion
 passed in 2020 to address climate change, this strategy sets out 
how we  will achieve net zero carbon emissions by 2050 and i mprove air quality across 
Buckinghamshire. We have direct control over emissions from our own operations but have lower levels of control over emissions elsewhere in the County - being limited in 
terms of our ability to regulate, purchase, enable or influence change.  Correspondingly, actions to address climate change and air quality are presented in 
sections titled ‘The Council’s Emissions to Air’, ‘Suppliers and Partners’, and ‘County -
wide’.  
The actions in this strategy have been  developed following workshops involving 
representatives from every council directorate, carbon emissions research, and public 
engagement surveys. They address: emission reductions from sources such as 
buildings and waste; air pollutant sequestration, absorption, or screening; and 
managing flood risk. The ‘Governance’ section sets out how we manage the strategy 
to ensure continual improvement – taking advantage of future developments as they 
arise to improve delivery.  
Tackling climate change and poor air quality presents significant opportunities for all 
of us. Helping everyone to recognise this and take action is critical to the success of 
this strategy. As such there is a specific focus on actions relating to communication and behaviour.     
 3 Our Approach  
Reducing emissions to air and adapting to climate change is a complex task. Nearly 
every aspect of modern life has a link to climate change and air quality, so our 
response must look at a wide range of approaches to reduce emissions.    
We have  an important role to play in getting Buckinghamshire as a whole to reach net -
zero by 2050 and ensuring that concentrations of air pollutants are at safe levels. W e 
are also directly responsible for ensuring our own emissions are reduced to net-zero 
no later than 2050. 
Whilst we have control of the activities which lead to our direct emissions, we do not 
have this same ability with all carbon emissions from across Buckinghamshire. In 
some circumstances we may have greater influence due to a financial relationship or 
regulatory function. In other areas we may be able to enable or influence change in 
other ways. As is shown later in the Evidence Base , the emissions we have direct 
control over are a very small proportion of the total emissions in Buckinghamshire, 
whereas those we may influence and enable change in are much larger.   
Our approach to reducing emissions is reflective of the degree of control or influence 
we can have over the emission sources. We have looked at how this applies in 
different situation and have identified four level within which we can take action as 
explained below.  
1. Direct Control : this is  where we are in direct control of the source of emissions, 
such as the buildings we operate. This is where we have the greatest level  of 
control, but this also represents a small proportion of emissions in 
Buckinghamshire. In these areas, we can directly take steps to reduce 
emissions.  
 
2. Financial or Regulatory Role : this is where we have either a financial 
relationship with a source of  emissions, such as with our suppliers, or a 
regulatory role, such as our role in the planning system. Here we do not directly 
control the sources of emissions, but we can use these relationships to support 
emission reductions from those who do have contro l. This is lower degree of 
influence, but over more emission sources  than we di rectly control .  
 
3. Enabling Change : this is where we can take steps that enable others to reduce 
their emissions, but outside of a formal financial or regulatory role with the 4 emissions source. This can include providing electric vehicle charging points or 
providing cycle and walking routes, which help residents to reduce their 
emissions by enabling them to take a lower emission form of transportation.  
 
4. Inform and Influence : we recognise that there are many sources of emissions 
in Buckinghamshire where we have fewer options to control or influence them . 
This can include measures individual households can take to reduce their 
emissions, for example by improving the energy efficiency of their home. In 
these circumstances, we can still support  residents to access reliable 
information on what steps are available to them to reduce emissions and highlight benefits of doing so.  
 
Our approach to achieving net -zero emissions and improving air quality  therefore 
reflects the degree to which the c ouncil can control or influence a s ource of emissions.  
Recognising these spheres of influence and how we can respond, 
we can summarise our approach as follows: 
• Where we have direct control, we will take action to reduce 
emissions.   
• Where we have financial or regulatory influence, we will look to 
use these abilities to reduce emissions. 
• Where we can enable others to reduce emissions, we will 
support that change.  
• In other circumstances, we shall seek to inform and influence 
those who do have control over emissions, with the aim of 
reducing them.  
 
Prev ious and Current Progress  
Though the council has existed in its current form since April 2020 , we benefit from 
the work undertaken at the 5 predecessor councils. Over the last 10 years, work 
undertaken by those organisations reduced carbon emissions from 1 5,117 tonnes per 
year in 2009 to 8,983 in 2018 – a 41% decrease.  5 There is no single action which is accountable for this reduction, but important steps 
we have taken include : 
• Upgraded over 22,000 street lights to highly efficient LEDs 
• Installed solar panels at 15 of our sites to produce zero carbon 
electricity 
• Improved the energy efficiency of our buildings, such as 
through LED lighting upgrades, insulation and improvements 
to our heating system , to reduce emissions by over 4,000 
tonnes / year and energy savings close to £1 million a year. 
This strategy therefore looks to build on this good practice and experience and 
continue to reduce our emissions in the future.  
We also continue to support emissions reductions from across Buckinghamshire in 
the way we d eliver services, for example by:  
• Increasing the availability of public electric vehicle charging 
points in Buckinghamshire.  
• Investing in sustainable transport infrastructure, such as the 
Waddesdon Greenway.  
• Working with schools to develop School Travel Plans and 
provide cycle training for pupils.  
• Working with Bucks Business First to support local 
businesses, for example through the Low Carbon 
Workspaces programme.  
 
Funding 
We have allocated £5 million to a specific C limate Change Fund which will help us to 
deliver further reductions in emissions , for example by improving the energy efficiency 
of our estate, installing more renewable generation and embarking on a programme 
of large scale tree planting.    6 A £5 million Climate Change Fund has been established to support 
continued emissions reductions, including funding tree planting, 
energy efficiency and renewable generation projects.  
We also continue to identify external sources of funding and develop bids for these, 
for example from  Defra’s Air Quality Grant  to help improve air quality , support for 
electric vehicle charging infrastructure from OLEV , and funding from BEIS  to support 
decarbonisation in the public sector.  
Developing this Strategy  
We recognise the complex and interconnected nature of activities that impact climate change and air quality  and have reflected this in our development approach by 
engaging widely. This document has been developed by staff from across the council and with input from a wide range of specialisms. We have engaged with community 
groups, councillors, community boards and the Transport, Environment and Climate 
Change Select Committee  who have provided scrutiny of an early draft and helped to 
shape our overall approach.  
We cannot act alone and have already seen a groundswell of interest and action in tackling these issues – we received 1,400  of responses to our resident and 
organisation engagement surveys  with over 90% of respondents saying that climate 
change and air quality are important to them .  
Responding to COVID -19 
The effectiveness of working together could no t be better exemplified than by the 
collective response to the Covid- 19 pandemic in 2020 – there were significant 
decreases in greenhouse gas ( GHG ) emissions over the lockdown period with the 
BBC reporting a 17% drop in daily GHG emissions . This is largely due to a reduction 
in transport movements  and there have also been reports of lower emission s of oxides 
of nitrogen and sulphur dioxide . Howe ver, as the lockdown eases, transport 
movements have risen, and it  is possible that the energy used by people working at 
home is greater than the energy required when they  are working in commercial spaces 
(offices etc). Therefore,  any transport emissions s avings could be cancelled out 
(negated) by increased domestic property emissions.  7 Buildings now have a lower person capacity due to social distancing measures. This 
has meant that opportunities to reduce the amount of space or buildings an 
organisation occupies may no longer exist. We will be in a position to determine the 
extent to we  can rationalise our operational estate once working practices post -
pandemic have normalised. It will also give us the opportunity to consider our approach to accounting for emissions related to home working.  
Adaptation  
Adapting to climate change and poor air quality means putting in place measures to minimise or overcome the impacts now and in the future. Specific examples of climate 
change adaptation measures can include: installing better flood defences or storing 
rainwater to overcome periods of little or no rainfall in the summer.  
Many adaptation measures also help mitigate climate change and poor air quality – 
trees absorb/screen air pollutants and sequester carbon, but also absorb water, slow 
the flow and reduce the amount of water going to the ground (as their leaves intercept 
raindrops and water evaporates from the leaves); and their roots bind the soil 
preventing it from being washed away and allow for better penetration of the water 
through the soil – thereby preventing flooding. Trees, and green roofs and walls , also 
cool the air  – this helps reduce the amount of energy required for cooling buildings  
thereby saving the emissions associated with producing the energy. Green roofs and 
walls also act as an additional layer of insulation on a building and this helps reduce 
the amount of energy required to heat or cool it. There are ancillary benefits from plant -
based (green) measures as well, such as: improving biodiversity, food production (e.g. fruit trees, and roof allotments), improving stormwater quality, and being a barrier to 
noise and electro- magnetic radiation.  
Another example of a mitigation and adaptation measure would be implementing systems that store rainwater, such as household water butts. The stored water can be 
used for watering gardens etc in periods of drought. This means that you don’t have 
to use drinking water for the same purpose and as producing drinking water uses 
energy etc you’ve reduced the emissions associated with watering gardens.  
Given the link between mitigation and adaptation measures, this strategy doesn’t list actions as being specifically one or the other type of measure. We have referenced 
blue and green infrastructure measures in the actions which refer to any initiatives 
involving water (blue) or plants (green) and these can generally be considered as both 
mitigation and adaptation measures.  8  9 Policy and Regulatory Context  
The Climate Change Act 2008  is the principle UK legislation which sets the UK’s 
national climate change target. The Act was amended in 2019 to move from an 80% 
reduction to a 100% target, creating a ‘net zero’ target  for GHG emissions . The 
national target is mirrored in our Buckinghamshire net zero carbon emissions ambitions. While climate change affects local government services, there is no 
legislative requirement on local authorities to report on or reduce their carbon emissions. However , we recognise that climate change is a national and local priority 
and an issue in which the council has a crucial role to play.  
National and European objectives and targets  have been set to establish 
concentrations of air pollutants at levels deemed to be safe. Part IV of the Environment 
Act 1995 requires local authorities to review local air quality and assess whether air 
quality objectives will be achieved. Local Authorities monitor local air quality using methods outlined in the Local Air Quality Management (LAQM) technical guidance  
and then reporting these results to DEFRA on an annual basis.   If it is predicted that 
these will not be achieved an 
Air Quality Management Area (AQMA)  must be 
designated and an Air Quality Action Plan put in place to improve air quality to acceptable levels.  
Nation al emission reduction commitments for overall UK emissions of five damaging 
air pollutants are detailed in the Clean Air Strategy . The Clean Strategy also sets out 
the Government’s plans for dealing with all sources of air pollution, making our air healthier to breathe, protecting nature and boosting the economy.  
To help regulate the emissions released by some industries the Environmental Permitting Regulations (EPR) 2016  requires operators of “regulated facilities” to either 
obtain a permit or to register some activities as “exempt facilities”. These fall into three different categories:   
• Part A (1) - The Environment Agency regulates what is considered to be the 
most pollu ting of the 3 industrial categories, A (1) activities. These are regulated for 
emissions to land, air, water and other environmental considerations. Examples of A 
(1) activities are landfill sites and hazardous waste incinerators.  
• Part A (2) and Part B - Local Authorities regulate A ( 2) activities, as well as the 
lesser polluting Part B activities which are regulated for emissions to air only. 10 Examples of Part B activities include petrol stations, dry cleaners and vehicle re-
sprayers. 
Clean growth  is refe renced in the Clean Air Strategy . It can be defined as  increasing 
national income and productivity while conserving the natural environment and 
resources, including improvin g air quality and tackling climate change. This policy is 
supported by DEFRA’s Clean Growth Strategy , and its sister document the 25 -year 
Environment Plan .  The first is a plan for continuing to decarbonise the UK economy 
throughout the 2020s, whilst the second is a long term plan for nature’s recovery and health.  These are complimented by the 
Road to Zero  which sets out the Government’s 
commitment to re duce emissions from road transport, and the ambition of the National 
Planning Policy Framework (NPPF)  to achieve sustainable development, including the  
protect ion and enhancement of our natural, built and historic environment.  The 
forthcoming Environment Bill  will introduce legally binding nature, water, air and waste 
targets from 2022. 
The aim of the current Government is to reduce the impact of pollutants on the 
environment in a manner that would enable this generation to leave the planet in a 
better state than we found it.  11 Climate Change 
Carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases (GHGs) create a ‘ greenhouse effect ’. 
This is where infrared radiation, in the form of heat, (and short wave radiation) from 
the Sun is trapped causing the Earth to warm. As concentrations of GHGs in the 
atmosphere increase, our planet gets hotter.  
GHG s come , or are emitted, from various sources  or activities. The majority of these 
involve processing naturally occurring materials containing carbon and/or nitrogen (using combustion, chemicals, and/ or bacteria). Mankind has increasingly used these 
activities over time to produce products (e.g. food, cement and metals) and energy  
(e.g. electricity) resulting in larger quantities of GHGs being released. Atmospheric 
carbon dioxide levels are approximately 45% higher now than they were before the 
industrial revolution and this is largely due to burning fossil fuels for energy.  
Human activity has also reduced the amount of carbon dioxide that can be absorbed 
and stored in natural carbon sinks. Plants and oceans absorb around 57% of the 
carbon dioxide that’s produced.  Removing trees (deforestation) and affecting plants’ 
ability to photosynthesize reduces the rate that carbon can be sequestered. 
Furthermore, as oceans get warmer from the greenhouse effect, they are less able to dissolve carbon dioxide.   
The Earth’s surface is now, on average, 1°C warmer than it was since the pre-industrial period. T he UK’s average temperature has increased by 0.8°C (comparing 
2008- 2017 with 1961- 1990) - the nine warmest years in the UK have occurred since 
2002. The warming of our planet is : increasing the rate at which polar and glacier ice 
is melting,  causing more extreme weather events and a rise in sea levels, and 
negatively affecting biodiversity .  
95% of respondents to the engagement survey reported that they were concerned about climate change and 79% stated that they are more concerned about it than they 
were 2 years ago. Climate change is affecting 3 in 4 Britons  and this seems consistent 
with th e 70% in Buckinghamshire identifying that climate change had affected either 
themselves or their family.  
More information about climate change and its effects on the environment, food, water, and health and is available on the GOV.UK website
. 
 12 The Global Challenge  
Climate change is a global challenge. It is critical that action to reduce carbon 
emissions to net zero is taken by all countries, in particular those which account for 
the most emissions  and can achieve the biggest reductions . Together China, the USA 
and India account for about 50% of global emissions as shown in table 1 below.   
Table 1 Annual global carbon emissions and those  of China, USA, India and 
United Kingdom  
Count ry Total greenhouse gas emissions 
(kilotonnes CO 2) % of Global 
Emissions  
Global  37 million  100%  
China  10.06 million  28% 
USA  5.42 million  15% 
India  2.65 million  7% 
United Kingdom  366 thousand  1% 
 
Emissions Data  
There are two approaches which can be taken to measuring carbon emissions in an area; these are known as the generation and consumption based approaches. The 
generation based approach looks at emissions which are physically created within a 
country or region, for example the exhaust emissions from cars in the UK.  
The consumption based approach looks at emissions associated with the goods and services consumed in a country. This means , for example, that emissions from 
manufacturing a mobile phone in China but which is purchased by someone in the UK, would be attributed to the UK  as the product  is consumed here.  13 These two approaches lead to different emissions with the consumption based figure 
being higher in the UK than the generation based figure. This is because the UK tends 
to import more  products  than it exports.  
The United Kingdom’s national reporting approach uses the generation based 
approach. These are  the emissions which the UK has greater control over and 
represents the physical emissions which arise here. As such, throughout this 
document the figures quoted reflect the generation based method.  
Most of the  emissions data referred to in this document are specifically referring to  
carbon emissions  (carbon dioxide, CO 2). However,  some  refer to a broader set of six 
greenhouse gases  (GHGs)  each with a different capacity to influence the climate.  The 
overall impact of these emissions is accounted for by reporting this broader set of 
gases  units of  carbon dioxide equivalents  (CO 2e). Where CO 2e is referred to, the 
impact of this broader set of GHGs has been included in the figures . 
 14 Air Quality 
Air quality is assessed against levels of specific air pollutants that affect human and 
environmental health. While some of them do have a global warming potential  (GWP) 
the focus is on how they negatively impact living organisms’ physiology and the built 
environment. Some air pollutants are acidic (e.g. oxides of nitrogen and sulphur 
dioxide) or are powerful oxidizing agents (e.g. tropospheric ozone) and will corrode 
the lining of the lungs , other  living  tissue, and inorganic material . Others can get 
through the respiratory system and affect the normal function of organs (e.g. PM 2.5), 
or are carcinogenic ( e.g. PAHs , benzene, 1,3 butadiene).  
The health impacts of poor air quality  have been widely reported in recent years . 
People are not affected equally - those with weaker or developing respiratory and 
circulatory systems are typically worst -affected , and higher -deprivation areas in urban 
centres are often located close to key sources of air pollution.   
National air quality  objectives , standards  and targets  have been set  for the following 
air pollutants:  
• Particulate matter (PM 10 and PM 2.5) 
• Nitrogen Dioxide (NO 2) 
• Nitrogen Oxides (NO x) 
• Tropospheric Ozone (O 3) 
• Sulphur Dioxide (SO 2) 
• Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons (PAHs)  
• Benzene  
• 1,3 butadiene (C4H6) 
• Carbon Monoxide (CO)  
• Lead  
The UK has also made commitments to reduce emissions of PM 2.5, NO x, SO 2, Non-
methane volatile organic compounds (NMVOCs)  and Ammonia (NH 3) by 2030. 
GOV.UK has more information on these emissions reductions targets  and more 
information on air pollutants can be found on the National Atmospheric Emissi ons 
Inventory website . 
Many of the major sources of air pollutants that affect air quality are also the major 
sources of GHGs, and by reducing levels of airborne pollutants that damage plants we 15 help maximise the opportunity for them to sequester carbon. T he intrinsic links 
between climate change and air quality are such that it makes sense to tackle them 
together.  
91.2% of respondents to the engagement survey reported that they were concerned about air quality and 69% stated that they are more concerned about it than they were 
2 years ago. The level of people very concerned about air quality (57%) is slightly 
lower than those very concerned about climate change (79%) and this could be 
because climate change is more prominent in the media and better underst ood. 
Buckinghamshire Air Quality Management Areas 
(AQMAs)  
There are 9 AQMAs in Buckinghamshire that have been declared due to exceedances 
of the annual mean national air quality objective for NO 2: 
- Chiltern  – Berkhampstead Road and Broad Street  in Chesham  AQMA  
(declared 03/11/2007)  
- Aylesbury  – Tring Road  (declared 04/07/2005); Friarage Road  (declared 
01/07/2008) ; and, Stoke Road (declared 01/07/2008)  AQMAs  
- South Buckinghamshire  – M4, M25, M40 and adjacent land (declared 
01/10/2004) ; and Iver Parish Boundary (declared 01/08/2018) AQMAs  
- Wycombe  – M40 and adjacent land (declared 01/08/2001); High Wycombe 
(declared 22/12/2017); and Marlow (declared 22/12/2017) AQMAs  
The main source of NO 2 is road transport. Air Quality Action Plans developed to 
address  the sources and impacts of NO 2 in these AQMAs can be found on the 
Buckinghamshire Council website . Concern about air quality was highest from 
engagement survey respondents located in densely populated areas (including 
Aylesbury and High Wycombe) where AQMAs exist. A map of all AQMAs in the UK 
can be found on the DEFRA website .  
Regulated Facilities  
Currently Buckinghamshire Council has 153 regulated facilities registered with the 
authority and the Environment Agency has 23 regulated facilities registered with them  
under the EPR 2016. These include, amongst others, landfill sites, energy from waste 
site, petrol stations, dry cleaners, foundries and concrete crushers. There are public 16 registers of all regulated facilities in Buckinghamshire on the Environment Agency 
website .   
 17 Evidence Base  
Global to Local  Carbon  Emissions  2018 
Global carbon emissions are continuing to rise and their distribution is uneven globally 
as shown previously in Table 1. Table 2 below shows the annual carbon emissions to 
a more local scale, showing the total of Buckinghamshire in comparison to other 
councils. Buckinghamshire has per person emissions in line with the national average. 
The total emissions by county can vary by a large degree to other counties, however 
the per person emissions tend to be closer. There are a range of factors which may 
influence the total carbon and per person emissions, such as the population of the 
area and how rural or urban it is in character.   
Table 2 2018 carbon emissions from global to local scales  
Emissions Source  Total Carbon 
emissions 
(kilotonnes CO 2) Percentage of 
Carbon emissions  Per Person 
(tonnes  CO 2 / 
person)  
Global  36.5 million  100%  4.8 
UK 366 thousand  ~1% of global 
emissions  5.2 
Bedfordshire  2,420  0.7% of the UK  5.3 
Hertfordshire  5,877  1.6% of the YUK  5.0 
Hillingdon (London 
Borough)  1,383  0.4% of the UK  4.5 
Buckinghamshire  2,832  0.8% of the UK  5.2 
Cambridgeshire  4,523  1.2% of the UK  6.9 18 Oxfordshire  4,079  1.1% of the UK  5.9 
Buckinghamshire Carbon Emissions  
Carbon emission data at an area wide scale requires multiple different sources of data 
to be brought together. The Government compile this data and a summary of the key 
emission sources in Buckinghamshire is shown in table 3 below.  
Table 3 Buckinghamshire 2018 carbon emissions by source  
Source  Annual Carbon 
Emissions (k ilotonnes 
CO 2)  % of Carbon  Emissions  
Business and Agriculture  578 20% 
Domestic; Gas  575 20% 
Domestic: Electricity  231 8% 
Domestic: Other fuels  95 3% 
Transport: Motorway  657 23% 
Transport: All other roads  746 26% 
Transport: Rail and others  48.5 2% 
Land use, land -use 
change and forestry  -99 -3% 
 19 Together transportation related emissions account for 51% of emissions in 
Buckinghamshire. Although motorways account for only 1.8 % of the total length of 
roads in Buckinghamshire, they account for 45% of transport emissions and 23% of 
total emissions.  
Land use, land use change and forestry remove more carbon than emitted and act as 
a net ‘sink’ for ~3% of carbon emissions in Buckinghamshire.  
Buckinghamshire Pathway  to 2050  
Reaching net -zero for Buckinghamshire is  a hugely complex and difficult task. Some  
of the mechanisms for reducing or removing emissions  are not elements which we can 
influence via financial or regulatory means, for example:  
• Based on the number of domestic gas meters , removing emissions from 
domestic gas supplies  (20% of total)  might require removing or replacing over 
180,000 gas boilers in Buckinghamshire.   
• Road based emissions require a revolution in the transportation sector, away 
from conventional internal combustion engine (ICE) vehicles to ultra-low or zero 
emission  equivalents . We have a role in providing electric vehicle charging 
infrastructure to help service th is transition , with subsidies and the regulation of 
the manufacturing sector  sitting with the national government .  
• Electric vehicles need powering from renewable energy sources , with the 
regulation of the power sector a function of national government.  
• Market forces influence the development and deployment of low emission  
technologies.  
• The scale of motorway -based emissions indicates that a substantial portion of 
emissions on our roads are from those traveling through Buckinghamshire, for which regional and national transport  issue need considering.  
The above points help to show the scale and complexity of the task and the need to address  these issues both locally  and nationally . Our actions  focus on what we can 
do locally in Buckinghamshire. However, as our motion indicates,  we will work with the 
Government to support achieving net zero in Buckinghamshire and nationally.  
Economic, Population and Housing Growth 
Buckinghamshire is a prosperous area of the count ry and i s also an area experiencing 
notable housing growth and an increasing population. Carbon emissions in 20 Buckinghamshire may  therefore be expected to increase over time in the absence of 
action to reduce emissions from the existing population. The overall picture is complex 
however, with electricity becoming more renewable (low carbon) and improvements in 
energy efficiency the trend nationally has been for emissions to decline whilst 
population has grown.  
We have not attempted to model the impact of a growing population or economy on 
emissions in Buckinghamshire, but we recognise that these are relevant factors which 
will impact overall emissions.  
Buckinghamshire Council ’s Carbon Emissions  
We commissioned a carbon audit  to better understand the make- up of our own carbon 
emissions  for the 2018/19 financial year (the base year) . 
Table 4 Bucki nghamshire Council's carbon emissions  
Activity  2018/19 Annual Carbon  
Emissions (T CO 2e) % of Annual Emissions  
Buildings – Gas 
Consumption  1,887  21% 
Buildings – Electricity 
Consumption  2,516 28% 
Street Lighting – 
Electricity Consumption  2,336  26% 
Council Fleet  1,258 14% 
Business Travel  988 11% 
Total  8,985  100%  
 21 The emissions shown in Table 4 above are those from the council’s operations, such 
as the buildings and vehicles we operate. Business travel emissions relate to 
emissions from staff and Councillors in their own vehicles where a mileage expense 
claim was made . Emissions from the use of public transport, such as train journeys,  
for work travel weren’t captured as the data is not available.  
This data does not cover our services where our staff do not directly provide it, for example waste collection vehicles operated around 
Wycombe, Chiltern and South 
Buckinghamshire areas . However,  these activities are still included within the scope 
of this strategy  which covers the council’s emissions, as well as those of suppliers, 
partners and Buckingham shire wide emissions .  
It is currently difficult to benchmark the council’s emissions to other authorities 
because of the wide range of differences which make comparisons difficult. For 
example, different services are provided by a district, county or unit ary council. 
Comparison between councils of the same type is also difficult as reporting methods differ and the way services are delivered also varies, for example whether a service is 
provided by the council directly or by suppliers.  
Council Pathway to 2 050 
We have set ourselves the goal of reaching net -zero carbon emissions no later than 
2050. In addition,  we are establishing milestone targets for 2030 and 2040. We have 
aligned these with the UK’s national baseline of 1990 in order to aid comparison of carbon reduction levels between Buckinghamshire and the UK.  
Compared to our estimated 1990 carbon emissions, we will: 
• reduce our carbon emissions by at least 75% by 2030  
• reduce our carbon emissions by at least 90% by 2040 
• reach net zero carbon emissions no later than 2050 
To enable this comparison, it is necessary to estimate our emissions for 1990 as we 
do not hold accurate data on our emissions from this year.  Data gathered during the 
carbon audit covered emissions as far back as  2009 ; we have assumed that energy 
usage (i.e. in kilowatt hours) was the same in 1990 as 2009, updating electricity emission with the correct emissions factor from 1990.   22 The UK’s national target is to reach net zero carbon emission by 2050 with an interim 
target of achieving a 68% reduction by 2030, based on 1990 emission levels.  
Compared to our 2018/19 baseline, our emissions reductions targets are to reduce our carbon emissions by 50% by 2030 and achieve an 80% reduction by 2040.  
The UK’s national targets are established in 5 year ‘Carbon Budgets’ which set the target emissions for the UK over that period. We will be reflecting this approach in 
monitoring our own progress towards the a bove targets – further details on our First 
Carbon Budget  are set out later in this document.  
Air Quality Monitoring  
A national network of automatic air quality monitoring stations is managed by Defra . 
These sites provide high resolution hourly information which is communicated rapidly to the public, using a wide range of electronic, media and web platforms. Details of 
both automatic and non- automatic monitoring networks [systems that measure less 
frequently compared to automatic networks - either daily, w eekly or monthly - and 
samples are collected by some physical means (such as diffusion tube or filter)] can 
be found on the UK Air website
. 
Buckinghamshire Council mainly monitors nitrogen dioxide using passive diffusion 
tube technology. Some can be found in the AQMAs, others are found on village high 
streets and on busy roads.  The results for each calendar year can be found in the 
Annual S tatus  Reports for the South Buckinghamshire, Wycombe , Chiltern , and 
Aylesbury  areas of the County.  We also manage and maintain two continuous 
monitoring stations in Buckinghamshire - in Stokenchurch and High Wycombe. The 
locations and readings from these continuous monitoring stations can be found on the 
UK Air Quality website .    
Buckinghamshire Council, in conjunction with Spelthorne and Heathrow Airport Limited, received grant funding to trial low -cost sensors in the South Bucks area.  
Further information on the sensors and monitoring data can be seen on the 
Air Quality 
England website .  
 23 Targets 
The following aims and objectives of this strategy  address climate change  and poor 
air quality respectively. They  are in line with the council motion that was passed on 15 
July 2020  and pursuant to achieving national air quality objectives and standards 
across Buckinghamshire.  
Climate Change  
 
Aim 1: Work alongside national Government with the objective to 
achieve net zero  carbon emissions for Buckinghamshire as a whole 
by 2050.  
 
Objective A: Achieve net zero carbon emissions across council 
operations no later than 2050 and possibly before this, potentially 
by 2030, subject to resources.  
 
Objective B: Support communities to achieve net zero carbon 
emissions. 
First Carbon Budget  
The UK monitor s its progress toward its carbon reduction targets through 5 year 
carbon budget periods. We are adopting this approach and will monitor our carbon 
emission reductions against 5 year carbon budgets.  
The current UK carbon budget r uns from 2018 to 2022; the next from 2023 to 2027. 
We have chosen to use an initial 7 year carbon budget period to align ourselves with 
the next national carbon budget period. Subsequent carbon budgets  will be 5 year s. 
Our initial carbon budget will therefore cover the financial years 2020/21  (the first 
year of Buckinghamshire Council existing) to 2026/27 .  
Though the Carbon Budgets span multiple year, to support annual  monitoring 
indicative annual allowances have been determined. These will allow us to see if 
emissions are declining at a suitable rate. The use of a multi -year budget approach 
allows for annual variations in the emissions reduction achieved. For example, a 24 particularly cold winter would lead to more emission from gas heating systems are 
used than expected, but within a longer -term trend of emission reductions.   
Table 5 below sets out these indicative allocations for the first carbon budget period.  
Table 5 - First Carbon Budget Annual Emission Allocations  
Year  Indicative Carbon Budget 
Allocation  (T CO 2) 
2020 -21  7,895  
2021 -22  7,407  
2022 -23  6,953  
2023 -24  6,527  
2024 -25  6,129  
2025 -26  5,755  
2026 -27  5,403  
Total  51,139  
 
Air Quality  
Becoming a unitary authority provides us with an opportunity to harmonise our 
approach to delivering actions in the action plans for each AQMA. The aims and objectives below reflect our ambition to establish concentrations of NO
2 and other air 
pollutants a t safe levels.  25 Air Quality 
 
Aim 2: Improve air quality across Buckinghamshire pursuant to 
achieving national air quality objectives 
 
Objective C: Reduce emissions to air from all council operations. 
 
Objective D: Reduce human exposure to harmful levels of air 
pollution. 
Governance and Management  
This section sets out our overall approach to managing the strategy, refining our 
processes, and building funds so that we can continuously improve delivery against 
our targets and objectives.  
Actions 
 
1. Continued engagement with central government on air quality 
and greenhouse gas emissions issues. 
2. Explore carbon offsetting fund and low carbon energy 
generation investment options. 
3. Establish and maintain interdepartmental working groups 
accountable for the delivery of actions. 
Review and Update  
We recognise that this strategy will guide activity for nearly 30  years. Within that period 
there may be considerable technology, product or service advancements , and 
political, legislative and other changes  providing challenges against or opportunities 
to enhance emissions reductions. We will report annually on emissions  and against 
each carbon budget , and the actions below take into account future scenarios.  
Actions 26  
4. Review and update the strategy so that it is fit for purpose for 
each carbon budget, or more frequently if necessary. 
5. Determine the most practicable means of assessing the 
Council's Scope 3 emissions. 
Monitoring and Reporting 
Council Emissions  
The Council has established its new baseline GHG emissions via a carbon audit. We 
are setting a series of Carbon Budgets, aligned with the UK’s national approach to 
reducing emissions to net zero in stages.  
Actions 
 
6. Monitor and report quarterly on emissions savings across 
Council operations. 
7. Improve data management and quality to better inform  
options for reducing emissions  and performance monitoring. 
 
County -wide Emissions  
Emissions data from activity acros s Buckinghamshire is complex and varied in its 
collection and reporting methodology. 73.6% of respondents to the engagement 
survey consider the monitoring of air pollution to be very important in tackling climate 
change and poor air quality. We will improv e our air pollution monitoring and report 
against the progress we make annually on reducing emissions to air.  
Actions 
 
8. Maintain and enhance effectiveness of outdoor air pollution 
monitoring. 27 9. Report annually on progress made against actions and 
reducing emissions.  28 The Council’s Emissions  
New low and zero carbon technologies are being rapidly developed and have a 
potentially important role to play in helping reduce our emissions. We recognise the 
need to use innovati ve solutions , and dedicate funding and technical support , to 
effectively deliver against the objectives in this strategy.  We will maximise 
opportunities to secure funding from schemes, such as those offered by SALIX  and 
the Office for Low Emission Vehicles (for electric vehicle charging infrastructure  and 
plug- in vehicles  etc.), to  support the delivery of actions in this strategy.  
Actions 
 
10. Monitor the development of innovative solutions which could 
help reduce our emissions.  
11. Review  carbon offsetting options and develop a policy on 
their use. 
A range of initiatives to reduce our  emissions have been implemented already ranging 
from energy efficiency and renewable energy projects  to using electric vehicles in our 
fleet. We will investigate and implement appropriate measures to address mitigate and 
adapt to climate change and poor air quality.  
Actions 
 
12. Explore the potential for renewable energy generation 
projects on the council’s land (e.g. a solar farm).  
13. Implement a large scale tree planting programme across the 
estate. 
14. Explore the potential for blue and green infrastructure 
improvement projects (e.g. green roofs) across our estate. 29 Behaviour 
The actions below reflect the importance we place on creating a corporate culture that 
makes c limate change and air quality a priority.  
Actions 
 
15. Embed climate change and air quality considerations in 
policy and decision making. 
16. Engage and inform staff and councillors how they can reduce 
emissions through simple changes to behaviour.  
The Council’s Operational Estate  
The council’s Operational Estate is comprised of buildings and land we operate our  
services from. We will evaluate sites regarding the appropriateness of implementing 
blue, green, and sustainable/alternative energy projects  taking into account the cost -
benefit of initiatives, asset maintenance and replacement aspects, and our 
accommodation strategy.  
Operational Buildings  
We will assess the cost -benefit of sustainable energy options , taking into account  the 
age and condition of our assets , and  employ appropriate technologies to reduce the 
emissions footprint of our buildings.  
Action 
 
17. Identify and implement renewable energy and energy 
efficiency measures across the operational estate, in line with 
the acc ommodation strategy and repair and renewal cycles. 30 New Builds  and Expansions  
The council’s capital build programme, including new schools and school expansions, 
can incorporate environmental sustainability considerations at the scope/specification 
and desi gn stages.  
Action 
 
18. Ensure council new builds are as low carbon as practicable 
taking into account available budgets. 
Street Lighting 
Over 2 2,000 street lights  have had light emitting diode (LED) fixtures fitted to replace 
old lamps  and 52% of respondents to the engagement survey were aware of this 
project. LEDs require less power and last longer than the old lamps and are predicted 
to save £13 million in electr icity, maintenance and operational lifetime cost savings 
and 3,100 tonnes of CO 2e per year.  
Action 
 
19. Retrofit LEDs to remaining street lights by 2025 (subject to 
funding). 
 
Land  
Consultants have identified that there is potential for solar panels to be ins talled on 
metal canopies above parking spaces in some car parks and we are responsible for 
large areas of land that currently act as carbon sinks (including country parks ). We 
recognise the opportunity to maintain and improve the capability of these spaces to 
store carbon and absorb/filter air pollutants , while also protecting and enhancing 
biodiversity.  
Actions 31  
20. Conduct feasibility studies for the installation of solar car 
ports at appropriate parking sites. 
21. Enhance and support sustainable tree management 
practices. 
Transport  
A low number of respondents to the engagement survey (15%) were aware that we 
already have some hybrid electric and plug- in electric vehicles in our fleet. Many of 
our work -related journeys don’t involve the use of our fleet vehicles – staff and 
councillors use their own vehicles or public transport to get to their destinations. We 
operate two schemes that allow staff the opportunity to overcome the upfront capital cost of purchasing a bike or car by paying it back incrementally through their monthly 
salary. Under a cycle to work scheme , as deductions for a bike are taken before 
income tax or national insurance contributions (NICs), an employee pays less tax and 
national insurance contributions and an employer can save on employer ’s (NIC). As a 
newly formed council we need to understand more about the travel behaviour of our 
staff and councillors and monitor the effectiveness of actions to reduce our transport 
emissions.    
Actions 
 
22. Promote schemes which enable staff to purchase bikes  and 
ULEVs. 
23. Introduce annual staff and councillor travel surveys.  
Travel for Work Purposes  
Departments in the council are responsible for their own fleet vehicles. Many of them 
are using systems and approaches to ensure that vehicles minimise fuel consumption and costs, and emissions to air ( e.g. route optimisation and driving behaviour 
monitoring using telematics,  and encouraging eco- driving behaviour).  For example, an 
additive is used in some of our waste collection vehicles to reduce NO
x emissions and 
we currently use two electric vans and some electric pool cars (on lease 
arrangements). Our actions are therefore  centred around enabling staff and 32 councillors to lower their work travel emissions and implementing a plan across 
departments to improve emissions from fleet vehicles.  This plan will identify  when 
increasing percentages of the council's fleet will be replaced with ULEVs  
Actions 
 
24. Review the council's fleet and develop proposals to reduce 
emissions from its operation. 
25. Explore the introduction or enhancement of logistics/fleet 
management equipment, additives and lubricants, eco-
driving techniques, and alternative fuels to reduce fleet 
emissions and implement where practicable. 
Commuting  and Working from Home  
The change seen in s taff and councillor s travelling to and from their normal places of 
work or meetings is perhaps one of the clearest areas which the COVID -19 pandemic  
has affected. The majority of staff have worked from home during the pandemic and 
both informal and formal council meetings now take place online. This has 
undoubtedly reduced overall emissions from staff commuting during this time. What is 
unclear is how these emissions savings compare to increases in home based 
emissions, now that many of our homes are occupied during the day. This may be 
particularly evident in winter when we look to heat our homes when they wouldn’t 
previously have been unoccupied.  
Action 
 
26. Support staff and councillors to work from home (flexible 
working) where practical.  33 Suppliers and Partners  
Partners  
Buckin ghamshire Local Enterprise Partnership (BLEP)  developed Buckinghamshire’s 
Local Industrial Strategy . This sets out how the area will deliver the national Industrial 
Strategy’s aim to raise productivity levels and to create high- quality, well paid jobs. 
The Greater South East Energy Hub  works on behalf of LEPs with councils in the 
greater south east area to support the development and financing of local energy 
projects and BLEP has produced a Local Energy Strategy  for Buckinghamshire.  
Local business support and advice is offered by Buckingha mshire Business First 
(BBF). The BBF group includes Ngage Solutions Ltd which runs the Low Carbon 
Workspaces  grant programme for SMEs.  
We will work with these and other partners, including the 16 Community Boards  in 
Buckinghamshire, to support our private, residential, public, and third sector 
communities in addressing climate change and air quality as set out in the actions 
below. This includes providing guidance and information about funding (from the Tree 
Council , Woodland Trust, and other) to support community tree planting.  
Action 
 
27. Help communities identify, develop, and secure funding for 
projects addressing climate change and/or air quality. 
Schools and Academies  
Schools and academies have a close relationship with the communities they serve and many also work closely with the council via a range of support services, range from property maintenance to HR and IT support. Fifteen percentage of respon dents 
to the engagement survey were aware that some schools in Buckinghamshire have solar photovoltaic panels installed.  
Many schools and academies are already working to reduce their emissions and discuss topics related to the environment and climate change. We would like to 34 encourage this and will work with schools to understand what type of support would 
be most helpful to them.  
Action 
 
28. Support measures that reduce emissions to air in the  Getting 
to School Strategy and forthcoming Home to School Strate gy 
In addition to the above actions that focus on school transport emissions, we will build on our success of putting solar PV on school roofs to help generate a more accessible 
and compelling emissions reductions service for school buildings.  
Action 
 
29. Develop a service that  supports schools to address climate 
change and air quality issues . 
The Council’s Investment Estate  
We lease/rent  properties to individuals and organisations either directly from the 
Council or via our private investment partnerships  (e.g. Aylesbury Vale Estates  and 
Consilio Property Ltd ). The majority of our leases are full repairing and insuring (FRI) 
where tenants ar e typically wholly responsible for the fabric of the building, their use 
of resources (including energy) and the associated emissions. We are only able  to 
make changes to the building envelope (external walls, roof, and floor) etc. at suitable 
intervals (e.g. when the properties are vacant ) or with the agreement of the tenants as 
part of  wider  building improvements  to improve the environmental performance of a 
property . These are typically driven by commercial and investment return strategies. 
There is also  potential to improve performance through ‘green leases ’. 
Actions 
30. Endeavour to improve the energy performance of investment 
properties. 35 Suppliers  
In order to reduce emissions to air related to supplier activity, we must continue to 
assess and introduce appropriate requirements though our procurement and contract 
management work. There are a number of green public procurement guides  available 
and w e will priori tise engage ment  with high value and high emission  suppliers first to 
determine what can be done together.   
Actions 
 
31. Produce and provide training on green procurement tools for 
purchasing decision-makers.  
32. Work with key suppliers to identify opportunities to reduce 
emissions from their products/services.  
Gas and Electricity Supplies  
Many electricity, and some gas, suppliers now offer renewable supply contracts  which 
are marketed as providing renewable gener ation. However, the carbon emissions 
associated with such renewable energy supplies can be more difficult to robustly 
determine and may not be zero carbon. This is due to the complexity in the market 
and different way which such claims may be justified.  
We need to re -procure our electricity and gas supply contracts in the coming years 
and this provide an opportunity to review a renewable supply option against a 
conventional offer, both in terms of carbon impact and affordability.   
Action 
 
33. Determine the additional carbon benefits which may be 
achieved by purchasing renewable energy . 
Transport for Buckinghamshire  
Transport for Buckinghamshire (TfB) is engaged in a £45mill. a year contract to 
maintain and improve and roads and footways in the County and has a n objective to 36 optimise the use of energy and natural resources to protect our special environment 
and contribute to a carbon neutral county . The capacity of roadside verges to 
sequester carbon and filter/absorb air pollutants has been enhanced by the 
establishment of Roadside Nature Reserves . Changing the management of our 
roadside verges will reduce emissions and provide better quality habitats for wildlife.  
South Buckinghamshire Waste Collection and Street Cleaning 
Contract  
We own and operate our own waste collection service in the Aylesbury Vale area  but 
contract a supplier  to provide this service elsewhere in the County.   
Actions 
 
34. Use dust suppressant systems on vacuum sweepers to 
reduce airborne emissions of particulate matter from street 
cleaning . 
35. Install electric vehicle chargi ng infrastructure at waste 
collection depots by 2021 and commence use of hybrid plug-
in electric vans and electric street sweepers by 2022.  
36. Implement telematics system to optimise driving behaviour to 
improve fuel efficiency and reduce emissions to air by 2022 . 
37. Trial an electric waste electric collection vehicle by 2023. 
 37 County -wide 
This document needs to shape future strategies  and grant s so that the activities they 
influence result in positive impacts on climate change and air quality. New local  
emission reduction targets also need to be set to help achieve national emissions 
reduction targets for harmful airborne pollutants that are the most prevalent in the 
County.  
Actions 
 
38. Consider emissions in future strategy development and grant 
funding decisions. 
39. Develop targets for the reduction of reactive airborne forms 
of nitrogen and particulate matter. 
Transportation  
Transport  is the single largest source of emissions to air in Buckinghamshire. In 2018 
transport accounted for 1,452.1 kT CO 2 and road vehicle emissions have resulted in 
exceedances of nitrogen dioxide limits/targets in several areas in the County. Elevated 
levels of air pollution exist around the motorways (M25, M4, and M40), trunk roads 
(A40, A404), and other roads  that are heavily trafficked.  
Road and rail networks are subject to increased risks because of  climate change 
regarding  flooding, heat damage, rail buckling, bridge failures, and repair and 
maintenance costs.  
In addition to managing the road network with Highways En gland, we licence taxis and 
private hire vehicles, manage footpaths and other rights of way, and have a role in 
supporting sustainable transport. Considerable work has been done to support 
walking and cycling , and develop an electric vehicle charging network. 10% of 
respondents to the engagement survey currently drive an electric vehicle and 60% would consider driving an electric vehicle in the future. 68% of respondents walk 
instead of driving and over 40% recognised that the council had installed new cycle 
routes (42%) and electric vehicle charging points (45%). However, over 30% are least 
likely to cycle instead of drive (30%), use public transport (33%), or car share (44%) 38 largely due to the inconvenience, cost, or not having enough informa tion. Some 
respondents have cited other practical (e.g. ‘lack of public transport’), physical 
limitation (e.g. age, medical reasons, cycling dangers), information- related (e.g. 
scepticism regarding electric vehicles being ‘greener’), or Covid- 19 reasons as  
barriers to shifting to more sustainable transport modes.  Over 61% of respondents 
consider public transport improvements and more walking and cycling initiatives to be 
very important in tackling climate change and poor air quality. Overcoming barriers to  
reducing emissions from transport  (including a modal shift  to low/no emission forms of 
transport ) as far as practicable is critical to achieving our climate change and air quality 
ambitions.  We will also support modal shifts for journeys from Buckinghamshire to 
other parts of England’s Economic Heartland. 
Building on the success of electrifying trains running on the Paddington to Maidenhead route in the south of the County, we look forward to closely working with organisations 
that are licensed by the coun cil to operate bus routes in the County  and other s, such 
as Train Operating Companies  and hauliers , to improve transport impacts on the 
environment.   
Actions 
 
40. Reduce emissions from taxis and private hire vehicles. 
41. Implement initiatives to reduce emissions from freight 
pursuant to achieving the objectives of the Freight Strategy. 
42. Improve infrastructure for active travel  (such as walking and 
cycling ) and electric vehicles.  
43. Assess the carbon emissions from proposed road schemes. 
44. Trial low emission forms of transport, such as electric buses, 
bikes and scooters. 
45. Investigate the feasibility of introducing Low Emission Zone s. 
46. Reduce unnecessary travel by encouraging regular home 
working patterns and supporting initiatives that facilitate 
remote working.  
47. Improve traffic management technology on the highway 
network where practicable to reduce congestion and support 
more efficient driving. 39 Buildings  and Developments  
Activities  occurring both in and outside of Buckinghamshire impact air quality and 
greenhouse gas emissions in the County. Major transport hubs (such as airports and 
railway stations) and major developments significantly influence traffic volumes, and 
therefore levels of air pollution, on networks linked to them. We need to work with other local authorities and developers to maximise positive and minimise negative 
environmental impacts .  
We will continue to manage development through planning and building control to ensure new development in Buckinghamshir e is achieving these aims. Over 80% of 
respondents to the engagement survey stated that innovative technologies and approaches, and more wind power and solar photovoltaic projects were important to 
tackle climate change and poor air quality. L ocal plans an d policies relating to climate 
change (e.g. the Canopy Cover SPD
; and the forthcoming Buckinghamshire 
Biodiversity Accounting SPD ) steer growth towards establishing sustainable places – 
align ing it  with climate change and air quality  goals.  Government planning reform s, 
such as the Plann ing White Paper , influence  what we do  at a local level . The 
government is reviewing their roadmap to the Future Homes Standards and is looking at new homes being “zero carbon ready”.  
Actions 
 
48. Work with neighbouring local authorities and England's 
Economic Heartland to reduce air pollution impacts from 
cross -border and major transport hub developments.  
49. Produce a Technical Advice Note (TAN) on addressing 
climate change in new developments. 
50. Use opportunities coming out of changes to national planning 
policy to enhance environmentally sustainable aspects of 
developments.  
Historic Environment  
Heritage assets play an important role in addressing climate change  and poor air 
quality  and are educational – historic buildings are reused thereby negating the need 
for new development, and the materials and techniques used for construction are more 40 environmentally friendly (e.g. less processed, comprised of more natural materials and 
were sourced more locally than modern equivalents). While the historic environment 
is particularly vulnerable to environmental change and can facilitate green, blue and 
sustainable/alternative energy measures, this needs to be weighed up against protecting the significance of heritage sites.  
Action 
 
51. Explore means to protect heritage assets  from, and use them 
to address, climate change and poor air quality.  
Housing 
Domestic properties  are the second largest source of GHG emissions in the County  
and a recent survey by Save the Children suggests that many families are cutting back 
on heating and electricity  due to financial concerns. A  household is said to be in fuel 
poverty  if their energy costs are above average and their expenditure on energy leaves 
them with a residual income below the official poverty line.  
70% of respondents to the engagement survey are making their homes more efficient, 50% use a ‘green energy’ supplier, and 47% will consider installing a renewable 
electricity generation system (N.B. 12% have already installed one). Some 
respondents have stated that there are practical (e.g. home ownership, planning), or 
information- related reasons (e.g. technology reservations) for them not pursuing 
certain actions.  
We want to provid e the information that will help people take advantage of the 
opportunity to improve their environmental impacts  and mitigate fuel poverty. We will 
capitalise on opportunities to reduce emissions from this sector such as promoting the 
Green Homes Grant  scheme.  
Actions 
 
52. Support registered social housing providers’ implementation 
of sustainable energy and climate change adaptation 
initiatives in their stock. 41 53. Promote opportunities for residents to improve their homes 
to help them mitigate and/or adapt to climate change and poor 
air quality.  
Waste  
The Joint Waste Strategy for Buckinghamshire has guided the delivery of waste 
collection, treatment, disposal, and minimisation initiatives for the County  and a new 
waste strategy is expected in 2022.  It is apparent that many people are already 
minimising their impacts on the environment by: limiting their use of resources (92%), 
changing behaviour to produce less waste (87%), or reusing or repairing instead of 
buying new products (80%) (according to the results of the engagement survey).  
Existing  waste management practices support the achievement of the net zero carbon 
emission by 2050 target, including the following:  
• Requirements for waste contractors  to improve the environment impact  of the 
services they provide (e.g.  our contract regarding the transfer, management 
and treatment of green, food, bulky and wood waste, and management of High Heavens Waste Complex)  
• Monitoring carbon emissions associated with the treatment of hazardous 
medical waste  
• Targets to:  
o Reduce municipal waste being sent to landfill (target of less than 5% , 
achieved 0.2% in 2018 -19) 
o Reduce residual waste produced per household on a yearly basis ( less 
than 450 kg per household in 19/20)  
o Increase the percentage of  household waste sent for recycling, re -use 
or composting on a yearly basis (more than 60% in 19/20)  
Economy  
The Carbon Disclosure Project has worked with the University College London (UCL) 
Energy Institute to determine the potential costs to  global Gross Domestic Product 
(GDP) of failing to respond to climate change - $5.4 trillion USD a year by 2070 and 
$31 trillion USD a year by 2200. This will lead to a 10% reduction in GDP growth rate 
by 2050 and a 25%  reduction  by 2100.  42 Regulating and reducing emissions from industry and supporting businesses and 
charities that provide goods and/or services to the green economy are classed as 
being very important in helping tackle climate change and air quality by 80 % and ~50% 
of respondents to the engagement survey  respectively. Buckinghamshire’s SMEs 
have had the opportunity to access grant funding from the Low Carbon Workspaces  
programme to reduce their carbon emissions . The Connected Counties  project is 
making virtual working (working from home) and teleconferencing more practicable by 
extending superfast broadband infrastructure in the County  – which helps eliminate 
the need for travel and therefore reduces transport emissions. There is sincere interest in ensuring that schemes like these are available in the future, beyond Britain’s exit 
from the EU, and support is available to drive the development and provision of 
products .  
Actions 
 
54. Encourage the use of recycled, biodegradable, and/or 
recyclable materials in products. 
55. Work with Buckinghamshire LEP to support the development 
of the green economy in Buckinghamshire. 
56. Promote initiatives to reduce emissions from the private and 
third sector in Buckinghamshire. 
Environment, Land and Water  
Climate change i ncrease s the severity and number  of extreme  weather events (e.g. 
larger amounts of and more intense rainfall in the winter, and hotter and drier periods 
in the summer)  and therefore presents risks to water quality, water infrastructure, 
biodiversity and land uses . Respondents to the engagement survey identified that they 
are already being negatively affected by hotter drier summers (59%), and wetter 
winters (49%), and there are negative impacts on plants (57%) and animals (51%) 
from climate change.  
There are opportunities to manage plants ( flora), animals ( fauna), land and water 
sustaina bly in Buckinghamshire to maintain and improve natural carbon sinks, 
overcome water scarcity issues, mitigate flooding, and protect and enhance 
biodiversity . 88% of people responding to the engagement survey stated that tackling 
climate change by maintaining and protecting natural carbon sinks is  very important. 43 75% consider planting and maintaining trees to be very important  and 49% of 
respondents currently undertake these activities . Buckinghamshire is to benefit from 
being included in a pilot study funded by  Defra  and the Council will establish  a new 
Local Nature Recovery Strategy  (LNRS ) by May 2021.  The LNRS  will account for 
climate change and air quality impacts.  
Areas of Buckinghamshire have experienced flood events  and a Local Flood Risk  
Management Strategy  addresses flood risk and the management of flooding 
occurrences . The council is the Lead Local Flood Authority  and works in partnership 
with the other the Environment Agency, Water Companies (Thames, Anglian and 
Affinity), Internal Drainage Board (IDB), Town and Parish Councils and local Flood 
Action Groups to develop flood management projects and ensure communities are 
resilient to flooding. Initiatives include a Natural Flood Management pilot study funded 
by DEFRA and a programme of flood management projects supported and partially funded from DEFRA and the Environment Agency. ~80% of respondents to the 
engagement survey identified that more flood prevention projects are important in 
tackling  climate change.  
Response to the Sustainable Drainage aspects of planning applications continues to be an effective way of managing flood risk from new.  
Water companies involved in flood risk management in Buckinghamshire offer free or 
low cost interventions for people to use at their properties to save water  (including 
Affinity Water , Anglian Water  and Thames Water ).  
Actions 
 
57. Work with the Environment Agency and other partners to 
minimise the risk of flooding and improve community flood 
resilience.  
58. Support the provision of advice and resources to encourage 
water saving. 
Health and Communications  
There is clear concern in Buckinghamshire about the future impacts of climate change 
with 71% if residents worried about water shortages, 69% concerned about food 44 shortages, and 57% concerned about an increase in disease or ill health (according 
to the results of the engagement survey). 34% are least likely to off -set their carbon 
emissions (likely to be down to inconvenience, cost, or not having enough information), but some are undertaking other measures to reduce emissions such as growing food, 
making ethical choices and ‘supporting organisations’.  
There is a need to understand more about the health issues that poor air quality and climate change  present . Equally important is the essential role that we can play to 
make information available and accessible so that individuals are better informed about options to improve their impacts on the environment  and what we are doing to  
tackle climate ch ange and air  quality . Over 70% of respondents to the engagement 
survey consider clear and easy to find Information about being environmentally -
sustainable and the promotion of environmentally -sustainable living to be very 
important in tackling climate change and poor air quality. We have used the results of 
public engagement questionnaires  to shape the actions in this strategy and will use 
further consultation exercises to inform our approach to communications in the long-term.  
90% of our time is spent indoors  and some  activities and materials in this environment 
are sources of airborne pollutants that are damaging to health (including some building 
materials, cleaning products, and the combustion of natural gas or wood for heating or cooking) . The IPCC’s  Third Assessme nt Report  states that  climate change can 
affect human health directly  from severe weather events (e.g. heat stroke from hotter 
summer weather; or injuries from storms or flooding) or  indirectly through changes in 
the ranges of disease vectors (e.g. mosquit oes),  air quality, and water and food 
availability and quality. We want to enable everyone in Buckinghamshire to know how 
they can make a difference and the difference they are making.   
Actions 
 
59. Raise public awareness of climate change, and indoor and 
outdoor air quality. 
60. Encourage environmentally sustainable living via 
communications campaigns. 
 
 45  
 
 46 Glossary  
Base year  - A historic datum (a specific year or an average over multiple years) 
against which an organisation’s emissions are tracked over time  
Base year emissions  - GHG emissions in the base year.  
Base year emissions recalculation  - recalculation of GHG emissions in the base 
year to reflect a change in the structure of the company, or to reflect a change in the 
accounting methodology used. This ensures data consistency over time, i.e., comparisons of like with like over time.  
Biodegradable  – capable of being broken down into naturally occurring substances 
by bacteria and other naturally occurring agents.  
Biofuels  - Fuel made from plant material, e.g. wood, straw and ethanol from plant 
matter  
Boundaries  - GHG accounting and reporting boundaries can have several 
dimensions, i.e. organizational, operational, geographic, business unit, and target 
boundaries. The inventory boundary determines which emissions are accounted and reported by the company.  
Business as Usual (BAU)  - The emissions pathway or scenario if no f urther mitigation 
action is taken to reduce emissions.  
Carbon sequestration - the uptake of CO
2 and storage of carbon in biological sinks.  
Carbon neutral  - The emissions pathway that will ensure achievement of net zero 
carbon emissions pathway by 2050 (or other specific date).  
Co-generation unit/Combined heat and power (CHP)  - a facility producing both 
electricity and steam/heat using the same fuel supply.  
CO2 equivalent (CO2 -e) - the universal unit of measurement to indicate the global 
warming potential (GWP) of each of the six greenhouse gases, expressed in terms of the GWP of one unit of carbon dioxide.  
Combustion - or burning, is a high- temperature exothermic redox chemical reaction 
between a fuel (the reductant) and an oxidant, usually atmospheric oxygen, that 
produces oxidized, often gaseous products.  47 Direct emissions  – emissions from sources that are owned or controlled by the 
reporting organisation.  
Emissions  - the production and discharge of something. In this document it refers to 
the release of pollutants into the atmosphere (GHGs and air pollutants relevant to 
national air quality objectives)  
Emission factor  - A factor allowing GHG emissions to be estimated from a unit  of 
available activity data (e.g. tonnes of fuel consumed, tonnes of product produced) and 
absolute GHG emissions.  
Energy efficiency projects – interventions resulting in less energy being used to 
produce the same result/work (e.g. insulating walls and roof voids, LED lighting 
retrofits).  
Fossil fuels  – non-renewable/finite (not being replenished or being replenished very 
slowly) resources formed as a result of geologic processes acting on the remains of 
organic matter. Fossil fuels contain carbon and include coal, petroleum, natural gas, 
oil shales, bitumen, tar sands, and heavy oils.  
Fossil fuel derivatives – products made from the processing of fossil fuels. Plastic is 
made from fossil fuel derivatives.  
Fuel poverty  - A household is considered to be fuel  poor if they have required fuel 
costs that are above average, or if they were to spend that amount they would be left 
with a residual income below the official poverty line.  
Fugitive emissions  - emissions that are not physically controlled but result from  the 
intentional or unintentional releases of GHGs. They commonly arise from the 
production, processing transmission storage and use of fuels and other chemicals, 
often through joints, seals, packing, gaskets, etc.  
Geothermal energy - heat that comes from  the sub- surface of the earth. It is 
contained in the rocks and fluids beneath the earth's crust.  
Green power  - a generic term for renewable energy sources and specific clean energy 
technologies that emit fewer GHG emissions relative to other sources of energy that supply the electric grid. Includes solar photovoltaic panels, solar thermal energy, 
geothermal energy, landfill gas, low -impact hydropower, and wind turbines.  48 Greenhouse gases (GHG s) - GHGs are the six gases listed in the Kyoto Protocol: 
carbon dioxide (CO 2); methane (CH 4); nitrous oxide (N 2O); hydrofluorocarbons 
(HFCs); perfluorocarbons (PFCs); and sulphur hexafluoride (SF 6). 
GHG capture  - collection of GHG emissions from a GHG source for storage in a sink.  
GHG credit  - GHG offsets can be converted into GHG credits when used to meet an 
externally imposed target.  A GHG credit is a convertible and transferable instrument 
usually bestowed by  a GHG program.  
GHG/carbon offset  - offsets are discrete GHG reductions used to compensate for 
(i.e., offset) GHG emissions elsewhere, for example to meet a voluntary or mandatory 
GHG target or cap.  
GHG removal  - absorption or sequestration of GHGs from t he atmosphere.  
GHG/carbon sink  - any physical unit or process that stores GHGs; usually refers to 
forests and underground/deep sea reservoirs of CO 2. 
GHG source  - any physical unit or process which releases GHG into the atmosphere.  
Global Warming Potential  (GWP)  - a factor describing the radiative forcing impact 
(degree of harm to the atmosphere) of one unit of a given GHG relative to one unit of 
CO 2. 
Indirect GHG emissions  - emissions that are a consequence of the operations of the 
reporting company, but occur at sources owned or controlled by another company.  
Inorganic  - not consisting of or deriving from living matter.  
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)  - international body of climate 
change scientists. The role of the IPCC is to assess the scientific, technical and socio-
economic information relevant to the understanding of the risk of human- induced 
climate change (www.ipcc.ch).  
Kyoto Protocol  - a protocol to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate 
Change (UNFCCC). It requires countries listed in its Annex B to meet reduction targets of GHG emissions relative to their 1990 levels during the period of 2008 –12. 
Local Enterprise Partnerships (LEP)  - business led partnerships between local 
authorities and local private sector business es. 
Naturally occurring  – exist in nature without artificial aid.  49 Net zero carbon  - the amount of total emissions released on an annual basis 
averages to be zero or negative i.e. the amount of emitted emissions balanced with 
those removed or offset.  
Renewable energy – energy derived from renewable (naturally replenishing) sources 
(e.g. sun, wind, wave, geothermal).  
Recycling  - the process of converting discarded materials into new materials and 
objects.  
Recyclable  – capable of being recycled.  
Scope 1 emissions  - emissions resulting from the combustion of fuel (e.g. petrol, 
diesel or gas) within an area/by an organisation.  
Scope 2 emissions - emissions coming from the electricity that is used within the 
area/by an organisation.  
Scope 3 emissions - emiss ions associated with the goods and services that are 
produced elsewhere but imported and consumed within the area/by an organisation.  
Small and medium sized enterprises (SMEs)  - Non-subsidiary, independent firms 
which employ fewer than 250 employees typically.  
Sustainable energy projects – a general term referring to both renewable energy 
and energy efficiency projects.  
Telematics – technology in vehicles which allows information on the movement of a 
vehicles to be recorded and transferred to other systems,  so that it may be analysed  
ULEV  – Ultra low emission vehicles. A low emission car or van that emits 75g/km CO 2 
or less. ULEVs include pure electric vehicles, electric range- extender vehicles, and 
plug- in hybrids (PHEVs).  
UK Climate Change Committee  - Independent, statutory body established under the 
2008 Climate Change Act, to advise the UK Government on progress and action to 
reduce GHG emissions.  
 