A greener place
Man gwyrddachwww.caerphilly.gov.ukDecarbonisation  
Strategy: 
REDUCE - PRODUCE -  
OFFSET - BUYEV charging point, Council Offices, Penallta House1 DECARBONISATION STRATEGY: REDUCE-PRODUCE-OFFSET-BUY   -  Caerphilly County Borough CouncilForeword
As Cabinet Member for Economy and Enterprise, 
I am pleased to introduce the Decarbonisation 
Strategy for Caerphilly County Borough Council, 
which was agreed by Cabinet on 25th November 
2020.  
 On the 4th June 2019 the Council formally 
declared a climate emergency as a Notice of 
Motion, with full support from all political parties.  
As a result of this, Caerphilly County Borough 
Council has committed to being net carbon 
neutral by 2030.
 In response, the Decarbonisation Strategy 
- ‘Reduce, Produce, Offset, Buy’ has been 
produced. This Strategy focuses on reducing 
the Council’s own carbon footprint and sets out 
the overarching objective of being a net carbon 
neutral authority by 2030.
 The Strategy is accompanied by an Action Plan 
which details the actions the Council can take 
and an Energy Prospectus outlining potential 
commercial projects both of which will help us 
achieve our ambitious target.  These are living, 
breathing documents that will react and change 
over time to reflect external influences and 
Government policy.The Council has an excellent track record 
of implementing initiatives that benefit the 
environment and the Decarbonisation Strategy 
- Reduce, Produce, Offset, Buy builds upon this.  
The suite of documents focus on four broad 
categories:-
REDUCE
Reducing the amount of energy we use
PRODUCE
Generating our own ‘green’ electricity  
and heat
OFFSET
Offsetting any carbon emissions
BUY
Everything we purchase has embedded 
carbon associated with it and this will 
need to be considered in the procurement 
process
As a Council, we are leading by example.  In 
addition to tackling the climate emergency there 
are financial and social benefits to be gained 
from working towards becoming net carbon 
neutral and it is hoped and anticipated that our 
actions will stimulate our residents and other 
stakeholders to follow our lead.1. Delivering Net Zero 
CABINET MEMBER FOR  
ECONOMY AND ENTERPRISE    
Cllr. Sean Morgan 
Caerphilly County Borough Council2.1 Caerphilly County Borough Council 
(Caerphilly CBC) has an excellent track record 
of implementing initiatives that benefit the 
environment. The authority has reduced carbon 
emissions by investing in technologies that 
reduce consumption and we have worked hard 
to raise awareness of the importance of carbon 
reduction with our staff, pupils and residents 
across the county borough. 
2.2 However it is acknowledged there is still 
much more to do at a time when the climate 
continues to warm and sea levels continue to rise. 
Changes to climate will have a significant impact 
on the well-being of both current and future 
generations, with extreme weather events caused 
by climate change putting increasing pressure on 
ecosystems, infrastructure, the built environment 
and our landscape. Reducing emissions from 
our activities will improve our well-being and 
demonstrate Caerphilly CBCs contribution to the 
global effort on climate change.
2.3 Decarbonisation is the right thing to do.  The 
Council can also help stimulate green initiatives  
across Caerphilly county borough by cutting 
emissions and moving towards a low carbon  
economy there are enormous opportunities to 
create a vibrant and socially low carbon economy.The Effects Of Global Warming
2.4 There is consensus supported by 
overwhelming statistical evidence that the world 
is facing challenging times as scientific research 
continues to underline and reinforce the dangers 
of global warming.
2.5 A key document in the World’s understanding 
on global warming was published by the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
(IPCC), in 2018 titled “Global Warming of 1.5OC ”.  
The report draws comparisons between pre 
industrial emissions levels, our present day 
emissions levels and the impact on the world 
should temperatures rise by 1.5OC, and up  
to 2OC.
2.6 The overriding warning from the IPCC is 
that any rise in temperature should be avoided, 
however an increase by 2OC would result in 
far harsher environmental impacts than if the 
temperature increase can be kept to 1.5OC or 
lower.  
2.7 The IPCC acknowledge that: 
•  Many land and ocean ecosystems have already 
been changed.
•  Future climate related risks depend on the rate, 
peak and duration of warming.
•  Adaptation and mitigation is already helping 
but future risks will be reduced by upscaling 
and accelerating such activities. 
2 DECARBONISATION STRATEGY: REDUCE-PRODUCE-OFFSET-BUY   -  Caerphilly County Borough Council2. Introduction -  
Reduce, Produce, Offset and Buy
2 DECARBONISATION STRATEGY: REDUCE-PRODUCE-OFFSET-BUY   -  Caerphilly County Borough Council 3Adaptation  
and mitigation 
are already 
helping 4£4.1M    
to upgrade stock  
to LED lighting
£2M   
into energy 
efficiency
reduce 
emissions by   
45%1. 5ºC  
rise likely to be  
reached between  
2030 and 2052 at  
current rates  
of emission  
Anaerobic Digester, Bryn Quarry2.8 Lower risks are predicted at 1.5OC than at  
2OC, namely:
•  There will be variations to climate across the 
world with some seeing hot extremes in 
most inhabited regions, heavy precipitation in 
several regions and drought and precipitation 
deficits experienced in some regions. Increases 
in mean temperatures will be experienced in 
most land and ocean regions.
•  Land impacts on biodiversity and ecosystems 
will be lower below 1.5OC and for oceans there 
will be reduced acidity and oxygen levels.
•  There will be climate related risks to health, 
livelihoods, food security, water supply, human 
security and economic growth.
•  At the lower temperature adaptation needs 
will be lower, therefore less adaptation to 
natural and managed ecosystems.
2.9 Modelled pathway scenarios that limit 
temperature rise to 1.5OC rely on deep reductions 
in emissions of Methane and Carbon Dioxide. 
Cooling aerosols, non CO2 emissions such as 
Nitrous Oxide and Methane from agriculture and 
from the waste sector also need to be reduced. 
If deep reductions are met global CO2 emissions 
will decline by about 45% from 2010 levels by 
2030 and reach Net Zero by 2050. Pathways 
limiting global warming to 1.5OC require rapid 
and far reaching transitions in energy, land 
and infrastructure. Energy use must lower 
through enhanced energy efficiency and faster 
electrification of energy end use.
2.10 Carbon Dioxide Removal (CDR) including 
afforestation, land restoration and soil carbon 
sequestration must play a major role. A 1OC rise in 
temperature has arisen since pre industrial levels, 
with the 1.5OC rise likely to be reached between 
2030 and 2052 at current rates of emission.
2.11 The world needs to act now and that means 
Caerphilly CBC needs to act and play its part. 2.12 This strategy acknowledges the focus of the 
Cardiff Capital Region and it’s ambition that the 
region generates the equivalent of approximately 
50% of its total energy consumption in 2035 from 
regional renewable sources.   The Council is keen 
to work towards regional decarbonisation goals 
and to help to meet this target by identifying 
opportunities for green energy production.
Covid-19  
2.13 This strategy has been finalised in the midst 
of the COVID-19 pandemic, which is having a 
profound effect on the lives of millions of people 
around the world, bringing unprecedented 
challenges for our economy, our society and 
our communities. There is uncertainty around 
its long-term implications, including how the 
measures put in place to tackle the pandemic 
may also impact on our lives. 
2.14 Covid-19 has made a massive impact 
on people’s working, commuting and living 
habits and it is conceivable that some aspects 
of society will be permanently altered and this 
will undoubtedly impact on decarbonisation. 
Opportunity exists to maximise the potential 
of these changes, for example through agile 
working, increased active travel and reduction 
in travel by car.  We must recognise that our 
approach to the economic recovery that will 
follow provides us with a unique opportunity 
to sustainably rebuild our economy and make 
greener investments and climate positive 
decisions that set us on a pathway to achieve  
our climate target. 
2.15 During the preparation of the 
Decarbonisation Plan careful consideration has 
been given to the potential impacts of Covid-19 
including how it could influence the Action Plan 
and its implementation and we are mindful that 
the documents need to be kept under review and 
updated when, and how, our emergence from 
the COVID-19 crisis becomes clearer.  
56 DECARBONISATION STRATEGY: REDUCE-PRODUCE-OFFSET-BUY   -  Caerphilly County Borough Council3.  Achievements To Date
3.1 Over the last 10 years the authority has 
followed the principles of an energy hierarchy, 
and will continue to do so.
3.2 The general principle of an energy hierarchy  
is outlined as:
3.3 Adhering to this hierarchy over the last 10 
years has helped the authority to: reduce its 
carbon emissions through good housekeeping 
techniques; make good investment in 
technologies; ensure efficient use of assets 
such as buildings; and embrace renewable 
technologies. This has shaped some of the 
authority’s achievements to date.
3.4 Caerphilly CBC has a good record of 
implementing projects that benefit the 
environment and reduce carbon emissions. In 
2009 the authority launched its Carbon Reduction 
Strategy which focussed on reducing carbon 
emissions from its buildings and street lighting 
assets. Its target was to reduce emissions by 45% 
of those recorded in the 2008 baseline year and it 
actually achieved a commendable 42% reduction.3.5 The Carbon Reduction Strategy focussed on  
4 key areas which are still very relevant:
• Good Housekeeping;
• Invest To Save;
• Asset Management; and
• Renewable Energy Technologies.
3.6 The authority has introduced and executed 
numerous initiatives in working towards the 45% 
emission reduction target, not all of which can 
be outlined here. However a sample of what has 
been achieved is précised below:
•  The authority has invested over £2million into 
energy efficient technologies in its own non 
domestic buildings though its Invest to Save 
scheme called LAEF and have saved 35,000 
tonnes of carbon and has reduced it’s energy 
bills at the same time.    
•  The Council’s Street Lighting service  is 
investing £4.1million to upgrade its lamp-
heads to LED lighting. This is expected to save 
approximately 1,900 tonnes of carbon each 
year at current carbon conversion rates and 
again will reduce our energy bills.
•  There have been various Housing and WHQS 
initiatives aimed at reducing fuel consumption 
in homes including Arbed; CESP and Cy Cymru.
•  ICT Services has introduced measures to 
reduce energy consumption in IT equipment.
•  Caerphilly Solar Schools project was developed 
in 2009 which resulted in a number of schools 
having solar panels installed. 45 schools 
benefitted from small scale PV schemes with a 
further 8 schools having larger arrays installed. Energy  
Hierarchy
Reduce 
Energy Use
Rationalise
Optimise
Recover
Generate•  Wind Turbines. A partnership project between 
CCBC, led by Economic Development, and 
Partnership for Renewable successfully 
installed two 2MW wind turbines on Oakdale 
Business Park. Both the Council and local 
community benefit from income derived from 
this project. 
•  In September 2018 the Electric Vehicle Strategy 
and Action Plan was approved by Cabinet and 
a number of actions are being implemented, 
including the introduction of charging points 
throughout the authority.  
•  Greenhill Primary school was completed 
in May 2011 and was awarded BREEAM 
outstanding, with high scores in the pollution 
category and energy. The school has a rain 
water harvesting system, small wind turbines 
and an extensive PV array.
•  Islwyn High Comprehensive school was 
completed in April 2016 and was awarded 
BREEAM Excellent. The school has a large PV 
array. During high PV generation periods the 
school is a net exporter of electricity to the grid.•  The authority signed a Sustainable 
Development Charter which, committed the 
authority to make sustainable development 
our central guiding principle.  
•  The authority has declared a climate 
emergency.
3.7 The following graph gives an indication of the 
reduction in the Council’s emissions specifically 
from its non-domestic buildings and street 
lighting, through the direction of the Carbon 
Reduction Strategy.
7
Silver Street, Pontywaun
8 DECARBONISATION STRATEGY: REDUCE-PRODUCE-OFFSET-BUY   -  Caerphilly County Borough Council4. Notice Of Motion Declaring  
A Climate Emergency
4.1 On the 4th June 2019 Caerphilly County 
Borough Council formally declared a climate 
emergency as a Notice of Motion which was fully 
endorsed by the Environment and Sustainability 
Scrutiny Committee and received full Council 
support from all political parties.4.2 Caerphilly CBC has already engaged with local 
residents, key stakeholders and internal officers, 
through a series of workshops to establish what is 
needed to produce an effective decarbonisation 
strategy and to achieve the 2030 target. 
Cycle Path, MaesycwmmerAs a result  
of this Caerphilly CBC  
has committed to:
• Becoming net carbon  
neutral by 2030
• Develop a clear 
decarbonisation strategy  
to allow us to hit
the 2030 target 5. Vision Statement
5.1 By 2030 Caerphilly CBC will be Net Carbon 
Neutral:- The local authority will dramatically 
REDUCE consumption levels, PRODUCE its own 
green clean electricity, OFFSET carbon emissions 
and look to limit its carbon impact through the 
goods and services that the authority BUYS. 
Objectives
5.2 Over the next 10 years: 
5.3 Caerphilly CBC will have quantified its Carbon 
Footprint and worked towards negating that 
value. The Council will do its utmost to identify 
and implement some easy carbon wins where 
they are available and all departments will work 
collaboratively to make the harder carbon savings 
become a reality. Along the way the authority 
will continue to liaise with our community and 
key stakeholders to ensure it delivers on all key 
carbon reduction targets. 
5.4 By becoming net carbon neutral by 2030, the 
Authority will help to create a more robust county 
borough by stimulating jobs in the “Low Carbon” 
Sector. This will not only make our environment 
greener and more stable, but will help local 
residents into work and out of poverty, making 
communities more resilient to change.  
5.5 Caerphilly CBC will explore all opportunities 
for reducing carbon emissions. It will greatly 
reduce its carbon emission rate by improving 
control on what the authority buys, on goods, 
works and services. In 18/19 Caerphilly CBC 
spent £65 million just on construction. There 
are enormous opportunities to refine how the 
authority builds so that it improves energy 
efficiency through product selection and  
energy generation. 5.6 Caerphilly CBC will focus on constructing 
buildings without fossil fuelled heating systems 
and existing buildings will be improved so that 
they embrace energy efficiency initiatives and 
utilise renewable energy sources where possible.
5.7 Caerphilly CBC will look to minimise waste 
as much as possible and explore opportunities 
around these waste streams which will include 
procurement, treatment & disposal. 
5.8 Caerphilly CBC will greatly reduce the volume 
of miles travelled and those miles that are covered 
will be done so from more sustainable modes of 
transport. 
5.9 Caerphilly CBC will continue to improve its 
carbon reduction by exploring afforestation, 
creation of new wetlands, development and 
changes in land use to maximise carbon 
capture through sequestration. If technological 
advancements allow, consideration will be given 
to physical Carbon Capture Storage options as 
well as biological storage. 
5.10 Caerphilly CBC will act as a leader in 
technology where possible to stimulate carbon 
reduction. 
5.11 The Authority’s Decarbonisation Strategy 
seeks to implement these objectives over the 
next 10 year period.  
9
Anaerobic Digester, Bryn Quarry10 DECARBONISATION STRATEGY: REDUCE-PRODUCE-OFFSET-BUY   -  Caerphilly County Borough Council6. A New Approach
6.1 Some UK areas have taken a narrow approach 
to decarbonisation. Welsh Government is following 
a more wide reaching route and is expected to 
ask Welsh Public Sector organisations to become 
carbon neutral across all of their activities. Welsh 
Government will expect organisations to measure 
themselves against Scope 1, 2 and 3 emission criteria 
(which are explained in more detail later in this 
strategy). This approach requests organisations to 
factor in all emissions, from direct emissions resulting 
from combustion of fossil fuels in cars and boilers, 
to indirect emissions resulting from processes such 
as the production of electricity at power plants and 
finally emissions generated from our daily activities.
6.2 These upstream and downstream activities 
that produce carbon emissions are significant 
contributors to Caerphilly CBC’s overall emission 
baseline level. The authority purchases goods, works 
and services from a wide catchment area with 
many goods purchased being carbon intensive in 
their production and haulage and this needs to be 
investigated to see how this can be changed. The 
authority will also need to consider the emissions 
resulting from its disposals. This is an approach that 
is not widely accepted within public bodies across 
the UK and will require a major shift in public sector 
thinking and a rate of change that will be significant. 
6.3 At present, the Council does not have in place 
all of the central guidance necessary to help in the 
full development of a Decarbonisation Strategy and 
the authority has tried to anticipate the approach 
that Welsh Government guidance will take on this 
subject, however the authority acknowledges that it 
may need to modify its plan as Welsh Government 
policy advice changes.Welsh Government Mandate
6.4 When Caerphilly CBC made its pledge to be 
net carbon neutral, it lobbied Welsh Government 
to provide the necessary support and resources to 
enable itself and other Welsh local authorities to 
effectively reduce carbon emissions.
6.5 Welsh Government has acknowledged this and 
is working collaboratively with local authorities, 
providing support and guidance. It recognises the 
scale of the task of attaining the 2030 target and are 
committed to achieving this goal.
6.6 In March 2019, the Welsh Government published 
Prosperity for All: A Low Carbon Wales, which 
includes some key policies: 
•  To replace the Carbon Reduction Commitment 
scheme (CRC), with another reporting 
mechanism for reporting carbon emissions on 
gas and electricity consumption.
•  To support the public sector to baseline, monitor 
and report progress towards carbon neutrality.
6.7 Welsh Government will need to report its 
progress on attaining its net zero carbon 2030 
targets and will therefore require authorities to 
report to them. In order to measure impact, we need 
to better understand our current carbon footprint, 
our baseline.  There are currently no mandatory 
targets or reporting mechanisms, however this is 
expected to change.  The Council will be evolving its 
own reporting protocol based on UK Government 
guidance. 11Cardiff Capital Region  
Energy Strategy
6.8 Cardiff Capital Region (CCR) recognises 
that there needs to be a regional focus on the 
decarbonisation agenda. The draft Cardiff Capital 
Region Energy Strategy has been developed with 
support from regional stakeholders, including local 
authorities.    The overall objective being to develop 
a pathway identifying key interventions to deliver 
on the region’s ambitions for decarbonising its 
energy system.
6.9 An Energy Vision Scenario has been modelled 
to set out a potential decarbonisation route that will 
put the region on track to achieve a net zero energy 
system by 2050. 
The CCR vision is:
6.10 To create the conditions for a transition to a 
carbon neutral economy and society in the CCR, 
using low carbon energy as an enabler of economic 
regeneration, growing our regional income whilst 
maintaining guardianship of our environment 
through a laser-focus on clean growth.6.11 The strategy includes five priorities for 
achieving its vision:- 
• Energy Efficiency and Heat
• Electricity and Flexibility
• Decarbonise Transport
• Grow Business and Jobs
•  Coordination, planning, regional support and 
ownership of the plan
6.12 Caerphilly CBC has acknowledged and 
responded to the Cardiff Capital Region Energy 
Strategy in developing its own objectives and key 
intervention areas. The Council is responding to the 
need to deliver decarbonisation, encouraging the 
use of green technology, enhancing collaboration, 
sparking innovation and stimulating market activity 
in this field. 12 DECARBONISATION STRATEGY: REDUCE-PRODUCE-OFFSET-BUY   -  Caerphilly County Borough Council7. Establishing An Emissions Baseline
7.1 To establish the baseline for our net zero 
target the authority will:
•  Collect and analyse energy and  
CO2 emissions data;
•  Identify and assess intervention options and 
impact on emissions projections;
•  Define a route-map and action plan to meet 
the 2030 target. Green House Gasses (GHG)
7.2 The main GHG in terms of the quantity of 
emissions and the overall warming impact for the 
Welsh Public Sector is carbon dioxide. However 
there are other GHG such as methane (CH4) and 
nitrous oxide (N2O). These additional gases are 
often expressed as carbon dioxide equivalents 
(CO2e), which is the equivalent amount of CO2 
that would produce the same amount of global 
warming over a 100 year timescale.
7.3 Caerphilly will focus on Carbon 
Dioxide emissions in the early stages of the 
Decarbonisation Strategy but will look to 
include other GHG at a later point in the plan’s 
development.
School Planting Scheme
Ysgol PenalltauBaseline Carbon Assessment
7.4 Measuring the carbon emissions associated 
with a large authority is not a simple task. Some 
information will be readily available and in the 
correct format, such as carbon emissions from 
electricity and gas consumption on non domestic 
buildings.  However other information will be 
much harder to collect.
7.5 This will be a key actions of this 
Decarbonisation Strategy - to establish a 
comprehensive carbon value where there are 
currently large gaps in available data.
7.6 Where information is unavailable or partly 
available carbon emissions will need to be 
estimated. Inevitably there will be uncertainty 
around some data but as the Decarbonisation 
Strategy progresses the data sets will improve 
over time, and it is anticipated that the Welsh Net 
Zero Reporting Guide will further assist in this.
Greenhouse Gas Protocol
7.7 Key to understanding how net zero targets 
are set and monitored is the Green House Gas 
Protocol. This outlines what emissions should 
be monitored. Emission sources are divided 
into three scopes. Guidance to date from Welsh 
Government is that public sector organisations 
would be expected to follow this same protocol.  
However, the Council will also consider UK 
Government reporting protocol and guidance.
Scope 1 – Direct Emissions straight 
to atmosphere
7.8 These are direct emissions from operations 
that are owned or controlled by Caerphilly CBC. 
Our Scope 1 emissions must be included in 
the Decarbonisation Strategy. These include 
emissions from our non domestic building boilers, 
our fleet vehicles, bottled gas use, and diesel for 
generators on our main campus at Tredomen. 7.9 Direct emissions also include fugitive 
emissions such as gases that could leak 
undetected from an air conditioning system. 
Tracking fugitive emissions across Caerphilly CBC 
will be resource intensive and would provide little 
early gains for this reason this will not be the top 
priority in the early stages of the Decarbonisation 
Strategy but will be included at a later stage.
7.10 Direct emissions (excluding fugitive ones) 
should be relatively straight forward to quantify 
in the majority of areas as part of the baseline 
assessment. There will be some data gaps 
however such as distances travelled from home 
to work by employees in their own vehicles.
Scope 2 - Indirect Emissions 
associated with consumption of 
purchased electricity or cooling
7.11 These are emissions from the generation 
of purchased or acquired electricity consumed 
by Caerphilly CBC. Our Scope 2 emissions will be 
included in the Decarbonisation Strategy even 
though all of the electricity consumed on council 
owned non domestic buildings is already from a 
renewable energy source. The Greenhouse Gas 
Protocol (GHG Protocol) advises that organisations 
report their carbon emissions from electricity 
derived from renewable sources against the 
national carbon emission factors at the time 
of reporting. This will include all non domestic 
buildings and some housing properties.
7.12 In the majority of areas, it is anticipated that 
indirect emissions should be relatively straight 
forward to establish as part of the baseline 
assessment but will be time consuming.
13SF6PFCs
Scope 3
INDIRECTScope 1
DIRECT
Capital
goods
Fuel &
energy related
activities
Business
travelEmployee
commuting
Transportation
& distribution Waste
generating
in operationsCompany
facilities
Company
vehiclesScope 2
INDIRECT
Scope 3
INDIRECTHFCs N2O CH4CO2
Processing of
sold products
Leased
AssetsInvestments
Use of sold
products
End of life
treatment of
sold productsPurchased goods
and services
Leased
AssetsTransportation
& distribution
FranchisesPurchased electricity, steam,
heating & cooling 
for own use
14 DECARBONISATION STRATEGY: REDUCE-PRODUCE-OFFSET-BUY   -  Caerphilly County Borough CouncilScope 3 – Indirect emissions that 
are a consequence of Caerphilly
CBC actions
7.13 It is Scope 3 emissions where Caerphilly 
CBC and Welsh Governments aspirations differ 
to the majority of the UK where public sector 
organisations focus purely on Scope 1&2 
emissions. It is these Scope 3 emissions that 
will require the most effort due to data and 
information gaps.7.14 Scope 3 emissions will cover nearly all 
Caerphilly CBC activities and purchases.  They 
include both upstream and downstream 
emissions. The following diagram summarises the 
activities of Scope 1, 2 & 3 emissions. (It is worth 
noting that there are a higher volume of actions 
to be found within Scope 3). 
Scope 3 emissions include: 
•  Purchased Goods & Services • Upstream Transportation and Distribution
•  Capital Goods • Downstream Transportation and Distribution
• Fuel and Energy related activities • Processing of Sold Products
• Waste Generated in operation • End of Life Cycle Sold Products
• Business Travel  • Franchises
• Employee Commuting  •  Investments
• Upstream Leased assets • Downstream leased assets 7.15 Caerphilly CBC will now work to establish 
its carbon emission baseline as one of the early 
actions of the Decarbonisation Strategy. It is 
acknowledged that some data sets are not readily 
available so the baseline will be established using 
estimated data and where available accurate 
data. Over time the accuracy of the estimated 
data will improve. 7.16 As the baseline is being developed, carbon 
reduction projects will be delivered at the same 
time ensuring there is continual improvement in 
emission reductions.
15Tree Planting16 DECARBONISATION STRATEGY: REDUCE-PRODUCE-OFFSET-BUY   -  Caerphilly County Borough Council8. Decarbonisation Strategy:  
REDUCE - PRODUCE - OFFSET - BUY
8.1 The Decarbonisation Strategy and associated 
Action Plan and Energy Prospectus will focus on 
four broad categories of Reduce, Produce, Offset 
and Buy which align with those being used by the 
Welsh Government and have emerged through 
our workshops and stakeholder consultation 
events.
REDUCE 
8.2 Reducing energy use is the first step in the 
energy hierarchy. There are many ways in which 
the authority can further reduce its impact on the 
environment and specifically reduce the volume 
of carbon emissions it emits. Some primary target 
areas are outlined below.  
Existing Corporate Buildings
8.3 Good housekeeping principles will bring 
carbon reductions in each of the Council run 
buildings. The authority has a proven track record 
of delivering energy and carbon improvement 
projects by investing to save. The authority was 
a founding member (2004) of the National Salix 
scheme, which provides interest free loans to 
building managers for technology that reduces 
carbon emissions. Caerphilly CBC is the leading 
Welsh Authority when it comes to tonnes of 
carbon saved and figures highly in the UK league 
tables. To date, the authority has invested over 
£2million in property focused projects in this way. 
This approach has already helped the authority 
reduce its carbon footprint in direct relation to 
carbon emissions from buildings utilising gas and 
electricity.
8.4 Having buildings that are partially occupied 
is not efficient and the closure of under occupied 
corporate buildings will result in significant 
savings. The authority’s “Asset Management 
Strategy- Property & Land 2019” will help to 
consolidate corporate property assets and 
sets out the following objective: “To have the appropriate land and property, in the right place, 
operating in the right way, to facilitate safe and 
effective delivery of the Council’s services” . 
8.5 The authority is developing an Agile Working 
plan as part of the emerging Workforce Plan. 
This will reduce the need for staff to travel 
unnecessarily and should provide the opportunity 
for the Council to reduce its current requirement 
for office space. 
Corporate New Build
8.6 The authority’s 21st Century Schools 
programme has already delivered some of the 
most sustainable and energy efficient schools 
in Wales, such as the recently completed Islwyn 
High School at Oakdale. This programme of new 
build will continue with the same green ethos 
and will be an important contributor to meeting 
our net zero target.
Housing - Existing Stock 
8.7 Reducing energy consumption has been the 
key objective of the Council when considering 
its own housing stock. Over a third of the 
Council’s stock has now benefitted from external 
wall insulation. A large proportion has also 
benefitted from the introduction of more efficient 
condensing boilers and loft insulation. This work 
has been supplemented by the introduction of 
double glazing on the Council’s housing stock. 
Further opportunities will be explored to further 
reduce energy consumption and to establish 
properties as mini power stations, producing their 
own heat and power.
Housing - New Build Programme
8.8 The Council is committed to delivering new 
council housing, either by building ourselves or 
in partnership with Registered Social Landlords. 
Innovative housing techniques such as modular 
build and passivhaus will be considered by the YGG Fargoedauthority on its “new build stock” , helping to 
reduce fuel consumption by its tenants and in 
doing so helping to contribute positively towards 
addressing fuel poverty.
Street Lighting
8.9 Caerphilly CBC has approximately 27,500 
street lighting units. Since 2009 the Council 
has introduced a number of energy saving 
measures, the primary ones being inter-urban 
road part-night lighting and the replacement of 
conventional lamps with low-energy alternatives 
and dimming.
Travel and Transport 
8.10 The authority approved an Electric 
Vehicle Strategy and Action Plan in 2019 
setting out its vision to “Introduce an electric 
vehicle infrastructure across Caerphilly county 
borough, to maximise the economic, social and 
environmental benefits and opportunities that 
the electric vehicle agenda will provide, and for 
electric vehicles to be a fundamental part of our 
fleet” .
8.11 Work is underway to dramatically improve 
the charging infrastructure throughout the 
county borough to encourage residents to go 
electric with their vehicles.
8.12 The authority is also reviewing its whole 
internal fleet of vehicles to identify carbon 
and emissions savings where it can. This work 
will include reviewing and reducing grey fleet 
mileage – the travel that employees undertake in 
their own vehicles on behalf of the council.
Resource Use/Waste Management
8.13 Prosiect Gwyrdd is a high profile waste 
management facility that generates electricity for 
sale to the grid with the Council playing a major 
role in its development. In addition, the authority has local arrangements in place, such as food 
waste being disposed of at Bryn Quarry where it 
is converted into green energy via the Anaerobic 
Digester.
8.14 Each Council service area will have examples 
where they can REDUCE consumption. Easy gains 
can be made through the reduction of plastic and 
paper use and other simple changes to service 
provision such as a reduction in the frequency of 
grass cutting on council owned land assets will 
all help. In addition, investigations on recovering 
waste heat and reducing and using food waste 
has good potential for further reductions.
PRODUCE
8.15 Generating our own “green” electricity 
and heat at the point of use will reduce carbon 
emissions and will bring the added benefit of 
offsetting grid demand and reducing system 
losses associated with grid supplied electricity.
Solar and Wind 
8.16 The authority has already installed 
Photovoltaic (PV’s) panels on roofs of its buildings. 
In some instances these are small demonstration 
arrays on schools but the authority has also 
installed larger arrays to good effect and is 
currently investigating its collective non-domestic 
roof space for medium sized PV arrays.
8.17 To make the radical carbon reductions that 
are needed, the authority is also in the process 
of reviewing our land assets, in collaboration 
with the Welsh Government Energy Service, with 
a view to establishing large scale renewable 
technology at several of its land holdings. This 
work include identifying potential opportunities 
for solar and on shore wind farms.
1718 DECARBONISATION STRATEGY: REDUCE-PRODUCE-OFFSET-BUY   -  Caerphilly County Borough Council8.18 The Council already has been instrumental 
in a partnership project between Caerphilly CBC 
and the Partnership for Renewables, where two 
wind turbines have been installed on council 
owned land on Oakdale Business Park. Each 
turbine has a generating capacity of 2 Megawatts, 
capable of powering 2,000 homes.
Hydro Electric 
8.19 The authority has undertaken a review of its 
capacity to generate electricity from hydro. To date 
there is minimal opportunity to progress projects 
although Cwmcarn Forest may provide some 
opportunity to generate electricity for on site use at 
the visitor centre.  
Anaerobic Digester
8.20 As outlined above, the Council has local 
arrangements in place at Bryn Quarry where 
Council collected food waste is converted 
into green energy via an Anaerobic Digester. 
Opportunities to take electricity directly from 
this site and utilise it at the Tredomen Campus is 
a real possibility. Anaerobic Digesters (AD) break 
down feeder fuels such as food waste and maize 
to generate a biogas which is used to generate 
electricity. By utilising a locally generated electricity 
supply it will reduce the transmission system losses 
(wasted electricity) and free up additional capacity 
on the local grid.OFFSET 
8.21 In order to achieve net zero carbon the 
authority will need to offset any carbon emissions. 
There are a number of ways that the Council can 
do this:
Existing Woodland 
8.22 It is imperative that the Council effectively 
manages its current land holdings to ensure that its 
woodland remains healthy. The recent onslaught 
of disease such as ash dieback and Phytophthora 
ramorum makes it even more important that no 
more woodland is lost. A full inventory of council 
owned woodland is available and the Council 
works hard to maintain and improve its tree stock 
with the resources it has to its disposal.
Wind Turbine Installation Solar Panel InstallationTree planting
8.23 It is widely acknowledged that tree planting 
helps to lock in carbon emissions. Longer living 
trees such as yew, lime and chestnut will lock 
carbon in for very long timeframes, a process 
known as sequestration.
8.24 Carbon Dioxide removal through afforestation 
will play a major role in Caerphilly CBC achieving 
its net zero target, and the quantity of new tree 
planting that the Council aspires to is anticipated to 
be significant. The authority will need to undertake 
a land review to identify suitable areas that can be 
planted. Welsh Government is looking to establish a 
new National Forest within Wales and this provides 
an opportunity whereby Caerphilly CBC can look 
beyond its physical boundaries to join national 
schemes to offset our local carbon emissions.
Wetland Rewilding and 
sustainable drainage solutions
8.25 Wetland creation and rewilding offer 
similar opportunities to tree planting for carbon 
sequestration, as do sustainable drainage solutions 
designed into new developments.Fossil Fuel Divestment 
8.26 In parallel to developing policies to reduce 
emissions in Wales, the authority will also recognise 
that the decisions it makes leads to increased 
emissions both in Wales and globally. Fossil fuel 
based companies have long been a source of 
investments for specialist fund managers. Over a 
relatively short time horizon however, a decision to 
divest from fossil fuel companies and consciously 
make investments in industries delivering 
sustainable products and services could be made 
particularly with investments made with local 
authority pensions fund. Taking such an approach 
gives an important indication of our intent to go 
green wherever possible.  
BUY 
8.27 The new way of thinking required for the 
authority to achieve its net zero carbon goal will 
also focus on how the authority purchases goods 
and services. Everything the authority purchases 
has embedded carbon associated with it and this 
will need to be considered in the procurement 
process. 
19
Tree Planting20 DECARBONISATION STRATEGY: REDUCE-PRODUCE-OFFSET-BUY   -  Caerphilly County Borough Council8.28 In 18/19 £200million was spent across 
161,000 transactions by Caerphilly CBC with  
£65 million on construction activities alone. 
8.29 Establishing the carbon implications for 
each purchase the authority undertakes will be 
extremely difficult and some carbon indicators 
are not readily available. However Welsh 
Government has stated from their estimates of 
the carbon emissions resulting from the purchase 
of goods, works and services, that procurement is 
one of the most significant categories of carbon 
emissions for the public sector.
8.30 In the short term, the authority should 
consider procuring/purchasing goods that 
generate the lowest level of carbon emission 
whilst operating. Likewise if the authority is about 
to secure the services of an external contractor, a 
significant factor should be their overall carbon 
footprint.
Graph 1 - Total Authority Spend 
18/198.31 As shown in the Graph 1 over half of 
Caerphilly CBC spend in 18/19 is on Social 
Community Care and Construction.
8.32 Within Social Services there will be 
opportunities for travel mileage reductions, 
with better hi-tech ways of engaging with 
customers/clients. Other opportunities linked to 
Care provision functions such as energy saving 
measure on care homes will be explored.
8.33 Construction currently accounts for 25% 
of Council spend. Materials used in construction 
such as steel and aggregates are carbon intensive 
to produce and manufacture. Substituting steel 
for timber products would not only reduce 
energy demand at source, a Scope 2 emission, 
it would also lock carbon in the timber for many 
years if incorporated into a building, through 
cladding, flooring, internal walling or possibly 
structural timbers. 
Bike Pool Scheme Social Community Care 
 Construction 
 Human Resources 
 Public Transport 
 Utilities   Facilities &  
Management Services 
 Construction Materials 
  Information Communication 
Technology 
 Other 9. Action Plan
9.1 Implementing the objectives of the 
Decarbonisation Strategy will require a myriad 
of actions to be taken forward by a wide range 
of stakeholders. The Action Plan attached in 
appendix 1 sets out these actions in more detail 
and will help focus activity around target areas. 
Although the Council recognises the importance 
of data collection for benchmarking and 
reporting, the action plan will prioritise practical 
action over data collection as a means of driving 
forward change.
 9.2 In order to affect change, there will be a 
requirement to drill down deeper into the  
Action Plan and provide more granular detail on 
how each proposal within it will be delivered. 
In order to achieve this, it will be necessary to 
develop detailed action plans for each of the 4  
main themes of Reduce, Produce, Offset and Buy. 
These themed action plans will effectively  
hang together to form the main action plan and 
provide service areas  with the action/steps  
required to achieve the goals and objectives set 
out in the main suite of documents. 
21Bike Pool Scheme
 Y Gwyndy School22 DECARBONISATION STRATEGY: REDUCE-PRODUCE-OFFSET-BUY   -  Caerphilly County Borough Council10. Energy Prospectus 
10.1 The Energy Prospectus is a document 
that supports the Decarbonisation Strategy.  It 
sets out the key areas in which we will focus 
that could result in major reductions in carbon 
emissions, highlighting key energy projects that 
the authority is investigating.  The list of projects 
is not definitive and will change and develop over 
time.
Wind Turbine, Oakdale22 DECARBONISATION STRATEGY: REDUCE-PRODUCE-OFFSET-BUY   -  Caerphilly County Borough Council11. Financing
11.1 Local Authorities find themselves under 
enormous financial pressure and it will be difficult 
for Caerphilly CBC to identify resources to drive 
forward the changes necessary to achieve the 
goal of becoming net carbon neutral by 2030. 
A commitment is therefore expected from all 
council service areas to acknowledge this target 
and work towards it using their own existing core 
budget allocations. CCBC will also continue to be 
proactive in identifying external funding sources 
to implement change. Funding streams such as 
Salix have been used since 2004 to make radical 
changes in the county borough and it is expected 
that these funding sources will continue to be 
used to instigate positive change.
11.2 The Council, through the energy prospectus, 
has identified initial key projects that will allow 
the council to not only reduce its carbon 
footprint but also take some commercial gain 
from implementation. The Council is rich with 
resources such as land and property; assets that 
can be exploited to derive a commercial profit 
which can then be fed back into other green 
projects. In order to develop the suite of projects 
identified in the prospectus the Council is willing 
to invest under an “invest to save“ mandate.11.3 The Council also has a healthy relationship 
with a range of public sector bodies, government 
departments and external partner organisations. 
It is fully intended to use these existing strong 
relationships to deliver the changes set out in this 
decarbonisation strategy by ‘tapping into’ using 
these organisation resources where and when 
available.  
11.4 In terms of investment, achieving the 
decarbonisation strategy requires additional 
investment as opposed to “business as usual” .  
However, multiple economic assessments state 
that the return on this investment is far greater 
than leaving things as business as usual, for 
example in terms of jobs created, value added to 
the local economy and commercial return  
on investment.
23
24 DECARBONISATION STRATEGY: REDUCE-PRODUCE-OFFSET-BUY   -  Caerphilly County Borough Council12.1 The Decarbonisation Strategy is a living, 
breathing document that will react to external 
changes and influences. It is important that 
the plan has ownership to drive it forward and 
to adapt to take advantage of these external 
influences.
12.2 The Council has an established Regeneration 
Energy Project Group who will be responsible for 
ensuring the plan’s proposals and objectives are 
delivered. They will be tasked with liaising with 
each Departmental head to ensure that every 
opportunity is taken to meet the net carbon zero 
target by 2030.
12.3 Representatives from the Regeneration 
Energy Project Group will monitor and report 
on progress on the Decarbonisation Strategy, along with its supporting documents (the action 
plan and energy prospectus) to the Council’s 
Regeneration Project Board twice a year. This 
Board consists of senior council officers and 
Members from each of the main political groups 
represented within the authority and is well 
placed to oversee delivery.
12.4 While the Regeneration Project Board 
plays a role in overseeing the development & 
implementation of this plan, further reporting 
from the Regeneration Project Board to the 
relevant committee(s) & cabinet will also take 
place on a regular basis. 
12. Governance And ReportingSchool Walking BusA greener place
Man gwyrddachwww.caerphilly.gov.ukContact:  
Allan Dallimore,  
Regeneration Manager,
Caerphilly County Borough Council.
dallia@caerphilly.gov.uk
01443 866441