Climate Action for Chorley's FutureClimate Change Strategy
2022-2024
chorley.gov.uk /climatechange 
Our goal as a Council is for the Borough to be net zero by 20302
Climate Change Strategy / 2022 - 2024
Foreword 
As the Portfolio Holder for Climate Change, I am 
pleased to present this Climate Change Strategy on 
behalf of Chorley Council which will drive forward our 
work to deliver net zero for the Borough. 
For many years, our teams have delivered projects 
and services which have positively contributed to the 
mitigation of climate change. 
We have improved the biodiversity in our green spaces 
with our wildflower meadows, differential mowing 
of our verges, the annual management of our large 
meadows and the inclusion of bird boxes, bat boxes and 
hibernacula and wildlife only spaces.  We have also improved the quality of our wetlands 
across the Borough with new pond creation, existing 
pond improvements and a new reed beds in Astley 
Park and Yarrow Meadows to clean up the water which 
flows into the River Yarrow. Our woodlands have been 
proactively managed to eradicate non-native species 
and to enhance the age and variety of trees found 
within them.  
Chorley Council has a proven track record of working 
in collaboration with stakeholders, partners, funding 
bodies, customers, and parish Council’s.  We 
have delivered schemes to provide natural flood 
management working with the Environment Agency, 
on the river Yarrow to ‘slow the flow’ of river water 
providing resilience upstream. 
We have also delivered projects to promote sustainable 
energy and we have taken steps to drive up the levels 
of recycling we achieve as a Borough.  In 2019 we 
committed to significantly increasing our tree cover and 
we embarked on a tree planting programme involving 
our communities which will deliver a tree for every 
resident of our Borough by 2025.
This strategy brings all of this work together and sets 
out our ambitious vision, priorities and action plan 
which will help us all to achieve a greener, carbon 
neutral Chorley which is well placed to meet the needs 
of our future generations. 
Our comprehensive  programme of activity will deliver 
real , tangible change such as converting our Council 
vehicles to electric powered, decarbonisation of our 
buildings,  requiring our suppliers to demonstrate 
their goods and services are carbon neutral, and also 
investing in the improvement of our canal towpaths 
and enabling improvements  in cycle provision and 
bus stops.
There are things we can deliver as a Council and there 
are many, we will need your help with, from all walks of 
life- our local residents, our partners, our young people, 
and our businesses. Climate Change affects us all and 
together we can make a contribution and protect our 
Chorley for future generations.
Councillor Adrian Lowe, 
Executive Member for Customer, 
Streetscene and Environment
chorley.gov.uk/climatechange 
The Council’s Vision for The Future
Our goal as a Council is for the 
Borough to be net zero by 2030
In 2019 Chorley Council declared a climate 
emergency and set the ambitious target of 
becoming net zero by 2030. 
This strategy sets out Chorley Council’s vision for the 
future as a net zero carbon Borough and our priorities 
and programme for action during the period January 
2022 to December 2024 to achieve that goal. 
We must all act now to ensure we are able to cope with 
and recover from the physical risks that are happening 
as a result of changes in the climate. These include 
floods, droughts and heatwaves as well as rises in 
global temperatures and sea level rise and take steps to 
reduce the carbon we produce. 
What is Net Zero? 
Being a net zero Borough means that there will be a flat 
balance between the amount of carbon emitted into the 
atmosphere and the amount of carbon removed.  This 
needs a joined up effort from across a number of areas 
of our lives and the businesses we have in our Borough 
and includes transport, energy, and waste. 
There are also many ways we can use nature to deliver 
carbon reductions and build our resilience to changes 
in the environment, such as natural flood defences and 
helping biodiversity to thrive. What is Our Carbon Footprint in Chorley? 
Carbon footprints have been calculated for both 
Council assets and the Borough as a whole (for further 
information, a detailed report of the carbon footprint for 
the Council and the Borough has been published on 
our website).
The carbon footprint baseline for Council assets has 
been classified as the year 2019. This year was used as 
opposed to 2020 because of the significant changes in 
behaviour and lifestyle, including reductions in personal 
travel, working from home and leisure observed during 
2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic. 
The Council’s total emissions for 2019 were 1568.03 
tCO2e (tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent emissions), 
of which the largest contributor was the Council’s use 
of mains gas. 
The emissions of Chorley Borough are provided by 
The Department for Business, Energy and Industrial 
Strategy (BEIS) and we have detailed data records 
which date back to 2005, however the 2020 data has 
still been omitted as only provisional data has been 
published for that year. The Borough’s total emissions 
for 2019 were 651900 tCO2e (tonnes of carbon dioxide 
equivalent emissions), of which the largest contributor 
was transport. 
We will track our progress towards the goal of net zero 
by 2030 on an annual basis both as a Council and as 
a Borough. 
Changes in total emissions and emission type will show 
the success of previous decarbonisation efforts and 
inform decisions of future actions which must be taken 
to meet the Council net zero goal. 
Policy Context 
The Climate Change Act 2008 introduced the UK’s 
first legally binding target to reduce Greenhouse Gas 
emissions by 2050 to at least 80% of levels in 1990. 
Progress has been made between 1990 and 2017 
with the UK reducing its emissions by 42% whilst the 
economy has grown by more than two thirds.
Government has recognised the need to go further 
and on 27 June 2019, the UK government amended 
the Climate Change Act to set a legally binding target 
to achieve net zero Greenhouse Gas emissions from 
across the UK economy by 2050.
Climate change has dominated the headlines in recent 
times and there has been a notable shift in public 
concern over the environment, accelerated by the 
COP26 hosted by Glasgow in October 2021. 
4
Climate Change Strategy / 2022 - 2024
The establishment of impartial committees such as the 
United Nations (UN) Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change (IPCC) and the UK’s Committee on Climate 
Change (CCC) play a key role in publishing data on 
Climate Change and the environmental impacts and the 
forecast for carbon budget expenditure and progress 
against national and global targets and commitments. 
The Council’s Climate Change Programme is 
supported nationally through different legislation 
and national strategies including: 
• A Green Future: Our 25 Year Plan to Improve 
the Environment
• The Clean Growth Strategy
• The Clean Air Strategy
• The Ten Point Plan for a Green Industrial Revolution
• Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
• The Environment Act 2021
Following the UK’s re-emergence from the coronavirus 
(covid-19) lockdowns, the government has published new 
policies to not only Build Back Better but also to Build 
Back Greener for the economy and the environment. 
The Environment Act 2021 which received Royal Assent 
on the 9th November 2021, introduces new legally binding 
targets, many of which will come through secondary 
legislation to follow in due course. The 
Act is expected to be enforced through within the 
next 2-5 years.
Our Climate Change Strategy fully takes account of the 
emerging national policy and legal context. 
Timescales
This Chorley Climate Change Strategy covers the period 
2022-2024. It is accompanied by an action plan which 
contains short, medium and longer term actions, and it will 
be reviewed bi-annually to ensure the aim of the strategy 
and its actions are compliant with changes in national and 
international agreements/legislation in this area.Links to other strategies and plans
This strategy is aligned with a number of other 
strategies and plans not least the Chorley Council 
Corporate Strategy which includes the following 
objectives:
 
• Involving residents in improving their local area 
• Equality of access for all
• A strong local economy
• Clean, safe, and healthy homes and communities
• An ambitious Council that does more to meet the 
needs of residents and the local area. 
There are also links to others which include the 
Chorley Local Plan (2015), the Central Lancashire Core 
Strategy (2012), The Chorley Clean Air Strategy (2021), 
Emergency Tree Action Plan (2021) and the Douglas 
Catchment Partnership Management Plan (2019).
Our Strategic Objectives for Climate Change 
Radical changes are needed to address climate 
change and Chorley Council recognise that we are 
facing two unprecedented challenges:
• We must dramatically reduce our carbon emissions 
• We must prepare for unavoidable environmental 
impacts by building climate resilience into our 
systems and services. 
As a Council we directly emit a small percentage of the 
UK’s carbon emissions, but we influence around 40% 
of emissions through our roles as community leaders 
and via the services we deliver such as planning, 
streetscene services and waste collection. 
We are working with partners including Lancashire 
County Council and local community groups and 
businesses to progress the goals and aims of the 
Climate Change Programme. 
chorley.gov.uk/climatechange 
Strategic Objectives for Climate Change
There are five strategic objectives for climate change which shape our priorities and actions as a Council to deliver our 
goal for net zero.
  
Our five Strategic Objectives for Climate Change provide an overarching framework for our priorities for actions and 
guide what we plan to deliver to achieve our goal of a net zero Borough. Everything we do falls within a number of 
identified themes which are interlinked.
SUMMARY 
Climate 
Change 
Objective 1To understand the carbon footprint of both the Council’s activities and the Borough as a whole, 
now and in the future, so we can develop robust plans and track our progress
Climate 
Change 
Objective 2To dramatically reduce our carbon emissions as a Council and be an ambassador for change
Climate 
Change 
Objective 3 Work with our residents, partners, and local businesses to influence behaviour and deliver local 
projects to drive down the carbon footprint of our Borough
Climate 
Change 
Objective 4To significantly increase the tree coverage across the Borough and promote nature recovery
Climate 
Change 
Objective 5Enable Chorley to be climate resilient and better equipped to cope with changes in the natural 
environment including extreme weather events
Priorities 
The Council has identified nine priorities for 
action to tackle climate change. Under each of 
these we have a number of projects or activities 
which will all help us to deliver our strategic 
objectives for climate change and the end goal 
to be a net zero Borough. 
These are cross cutting priorities which include 
a programme of activity across a broad range 
of themes including the environment, air quality 
and nature recovery, transport, waste and 
recycling, policy, behaviour change and the 
built environment. 
The following are an overview of each of 
our priorities. Priority One: Embed climate change in everything the 
Council does from policy to decision making   
Chorley Council is committed to understanding and assessing 
the impacts for climate change in every decision we take 
and that for all of our activities (eg. development and waste 
collection) and to our events, we maximise opportunities to 
reduce the carbon footprint. 
Priority Two: Deliver the decarbonisation of Council owned 
assets and improve the sustainability of the Council’s fleet
It is crucial that as a community leader and asset manager of 
a portfolio of buildings and areas of land across the Borough, 
we are an exemplar for the greening of our buildings and the 
vehicles we use,  ensuring our open spaces and natural habitats 
are managed to promote nature recovery and biodiversity. 6
Climate Change Strategy / 2022 - 2024
Priority Three: Develop robust planning policies to 
deliver adaption and mitigation   
The future of our built environment is shaped by our 
Planning Policies, from the location of future growth to 
the design, materials and impact assessments and more 
than ever, these policies will enable us to future proof 
development creating spaces which enhance nature and 
add resilience to the environment.
The National planning policy Framework (NPPF) sets out 
the process for decision making and plan-making and we 
must comply with this when preparing our local policies 
and making decisions about planning applications. 
Our current policies are included within the Central 
Lancashire Core Strategy (2012) and the Chorley Local 
Plan (2015). Work is well underway to produce a new 
Central Lancashire Local Plan for 2023-2038. This will 
be a single plan for Central Lancashire which will seek to 
ensure that all future development is: 
• Sustainable 
• Benefits nature and our biodiversity 
• Carbon neutral (or delivers equivalent in carbon  
off-setting) 
• Promotes new forms of energy for heating homes 
and for transport 
• Does not worsen our air quality 
• Reduces the need to travel by private car and  
promotes active travel and also our health  
and wellbeing 
• Ensure new developments are well designed and 
‘future proofed’ 
Through the development of this plan, we will have a 
suite of policies which help us mitigate and to adapt 
to changes which are already happening and cannot 
be reversed, such as rising sea levels and changes in 
extreme weather events. 
Priority Four: Provide safe spaces for walking and 
cycling, promote sustainable public transport and 
greener private and commercial vehicles.  
The largest sector of fossil fuel use and carbon emission 
is transport.  Vehicles emit gases and substances which 
not only have a considerable greenhouse gas effect, but 
also impact on human health and wellbeing. These air 
pollutants include nitrogen oxides, particulate matter, 
and methane. 
Sustainable transport options include private motor cars 
which are electric or hybrid but also includes sustainable 
public transport as well as more active modes such as 
cycling or walking. By enabling the change to alternative 
modes of transport including enabling and or provision of 
infrastructure for electric vehicle charging,  buses, trains, 
cycling, and walking, coupled with communications to 
raise awareness and promote behaviour change, we can relieve traffic congestion, reduce air pollution and bring 
added benefits to physical health and wellbeing.  
Priority Five: Work with housing providers, 
landlords, developers, and businesses to 
promote and encourage energy efficiency and 
decarbonisation of buildings. 
The heating of private homes produces a significant 
amount of carbon emissions and many of our older 
properties are inefficient to heat which can impact 
on health, particularly in the colder months and 
cause fuel poverty. We need to find ways to bring our 
existing homes up to a standard of energy efficiency 
including delivery of a programme of switching to more 
sustainable methods of energy such as air source 
heat pumps and away from gas or oil,  improving 
the insulation of our homes to prevent heat loss and  
encouraging higher sustainable standards in new 
homes such as BREAAM. 
Priority Six: Promote low carbon incentives and 
enable access to government funding within the 
Borough for low carbon technology. 
There are increasingly more opportunities for 
grant funding for Council’s to access to deliver 
decarbonisation of homes, business, and transport and 
its vital the Council maximises these opportunities in 
what is a growing an emerging sector.
Priority Seven: Improve the Borough’s recycling 
rates and work with partners, residents, businesses, 
schools, community groups and internally to 
reduce the volume of landfill waste produced in 
the Borough
Reducing waste is an important factor with regard 
to climate change and sustainability and promoting 
the ideals of a circular economy. The advantages 
of recycling and reuse compared to producing new 
materials and objects from natural resources can 
result in lower demand for virgin material meaning,  
fewer quarries and mines are needed to extract finite 
reserves of metal ores, and less energy is needed for 
recycling, resulting in a reduction of GHG emissions, 
and the amount of waste that is disposed of to landfill 
is minimised. Recycling is easy and has a huge impact 
in the fight against climate change:
• Recycling 1 tonne of paper saves 19 trees from being 
cut down, which helps capture carbon dioxide. 
• Aluminium can be recycled repeatedly, saving around 
95% of the GHG emissions compared 
to extraction. 
• Recycling in the UK saves around 18 million tonnes 
of CO² a year, which is the same as almost 17 million 
of us switching from petrol to electric cars. 
The new Resources and Waste Strategy for England 
has set a much higher national recycling rate of 65%. 
Chorley Council provides a waste and recycling chorley.gov.uk/climatechange 
collection service to 53,000 households with a recycling 
rate of 46.6% and we know we can do better together. 
Priority Eight: Influence behaviour change by sharing 
knowledge, best practice and promoting debate 
around climate change across all groups and ages.
Human behaviour is a significant contributor to climate 
change and we need to win the hearts and minds of 
our residents, businesses and  visitors to encourage 
more sustainable ways to go about our daily lives which 
cumulatively will drive down carbon emissions and have 
the biggest impact.
Effective communication between the Council and our 
local residents, businesses and other organisations is 
essential to raise awareness and share ideas for change, 
which can be big or small. 
We have a variety of communication channels available 
to us that allow us to reach different audiences with 
messages about climate action, which maximise the use 
of digital channels and social media platforms, as well 
as physical events such as youth debate events and 
business summits.
Regular communication has provided opportunities to 
inform residents of the Council’s ongoing climate change 
initiatives, to gather residents’ feedback (e.g. through 
public consultations), to get residents involved and share 
tips and advice regarding sustainability.
Priority Nine: Deliver investment and improvements 
in the natural environment including waterways, 
areas of open space, natural habitats to deliver an 
increase in the biodiversity of Chorley. 
Chorley is a semi-rural Borough with a wealth of habitats, 
from public parks to waterways and the highest % of 
ancient woodland in Lancashire.  For future generations 
to be able to enjoy the benefits of wild animals and 
plants, we must safeguard their habitats and the natural 
environment as a whole. 
The environment provides for our educational, 
recreational, mental wellbeing and cultural activities as 
well as material needs such as water, fuel, air, and food.  
Nature and biodiversity have become a major focus of 
attention for all sectors of our community. As trends in 
data show a reduction in the diversity of our species and 
loss of natural habitats, rising temperatures and  sea 
levels, and carbon emission levels, a joined-up effort is 
required to take steps now to protect and nurture the 
natural environment.
Chorley Council have a track record of working with our 
partners such as the Environment Agency, Lancashire 
Wildlife Trust, the Canal and River Trust and United 
Utilities to deliver environmental projects which include; 
the creation of wildlife areas in many of our parks and 
open spaces, the  establishment of mini meadows and 
wildlife corridors along our roads, the  creation of a tree nursery and the planting of sapling trees, the creation 
of ponds for great crested newts and new wetland areas, 
achieving  green flag status for seven of our parks and 
the management of nature reserves across the Borough.   
The Council will continue to co-ordinate action to 
conserve, manage, and enhance Chorley’s wildlife 
and habitats ensuring an increase in the quality of 
biodiversity.  
Chorley Council works towards creating an inclusive 
community between the Council, partners, and the 
residents of the Borough. 
Effects of climate change are expected to impact all of 
Chorley’s residents in different aspects of life and it is 
essential that they are factored into, considered, and 
involved during decision making and supported where 
necessary. Work with the community regarding the 
natural environment is already taking place within  
the Council. 
Work has included: community education regarding 
climate change, support regarding environmental action, 
free community use of litter pickers and equipment and 
includes free collection of waste, community clean up 
days, environmental community grant scheme, providing 
grants and support to businesses which are working 
towards becoming more sustainable and ecological, 
and a school uniform swap scheme.
The residents of Chorley have shown passion and 
commitment to helping the mitigation of climate change 
effects and supporting nature and the biodiversity of 
the Borough. The Council is committed to ensuring the 
protection and enhancement of the borough’s natural 
environment. This enhancement, however, is not an 
offsetting measure for the borough’s carbon emissions. 
With community support and community engagement 
it will further the joint goals of a healthy and sustainable 
environment and community.
A great example of this collaborative approach to 
tackling climate change is the Borough’s tree planting 
programme. The Council committed to planting 116,875 
trees in 2019 and the Local Community have embraced 
the opportunity to help grow saplings and participate 
in tree giveaways,  a programme which is estimated to 
capture approximately 38,000  tonnes of CO² over the 
next 100 years as well as promoting biodiversity and 
visual benefits to our places.
8
Climate Change Strategy / 2022 - 2024
Action Plan
This Climate Change Strategy Action Plan sets out 
the programme of activity which is a mix of schemes 
delivered across the Council with many supported by our 
partners and involving engagement with our residents, 
schools, voluntary organisations, and businesses. 
Chorley Council cannot deliver our vision and priorities 
alone and we need the support of our residents, 
businesses, partners, and visitors to help us to make 
Chorley a greener, cleaner, and more sustainable place to 
live, work and relax. 
All of our actions fall within our nine identified priorities 
and will contribute to at least one of our Strategic 
Objectives for climate change and ultimately, our vision 
of a net zero Borough. 
How We Will Monitor our Performance
Performance against the actions within this strategy will 
be reported to the Climate Change Working Group each 
quarter and also as part of general service performance 
reporting to Executive Cabinet and the Executive 
Member for Climate Change.   
PRIORITY ACTION LEADCOMPLETION 
DATE
Refresh the Corporate Integrated Impact Assessment to ensure 
robust and transparent evaluation of environmental implications 
of new policies, strategies, and services.Performance and Partnerships Dec 2024
Objectives and measures to mitigate climate change where 
feasible are included in any new and refreshed Council policy 
including the Corporate Strategy Performance and Partnerships Annually 
Explore ways to introduce mechanisms to introduce into 
the procurement process the evaluation and assessment of 
environmental impact  Procurement Dec 2024
Develop a plan to progress the Council’s conversion to 
electric vehiclesStreetscene, Spatial Planning 
(Climate Change Team)Dec 2024
Undertake an annual carbon footprint audit of the Council 
and report progressSpatial Planning 
(Climate Change Team) Annually 
Develop and implement a Sustainable Policy for Council Buildings 
to ensure that all future development the Council undertakes 
meets sustainability and net zero targets and there is a clear 
action plan for existing buildings to be decarbonised. Spatial Planning 
(Climate Change Team)
Property Services 
Commercial Services Mar 2023
Complete and evaluate the trial use of hydrogenated vegetable oil 
(HVO) fuel to determine its safety and carbon saving throughout 
the fleetStreetscene Dec 2022
Complete the programme replacement of spent bulbs with energy 
efficient LED lights where feasible across all council assetsProperty Services Dec 2024 
Develop a roadmap for Council asset retrofitting and 
decarbonisation work. Feasibility studies will provide  
cost estimations, priorities, and carbon savingsSpatial Planning 
(Climate Change Team) 
Property Services Mar 2024
Develop & adopt Local Plan policies for climate change 
including flood risk & sustainable drainage, biodiversity net 
gain, green and blue infrastructure, open space, clean energy, 
and sustainable transport.Spatial Planning (supported by 
Climate Change Team)Dec 2023
Support local communities in the preparation of Neighbourhood 
Plans and incorporation of policies for Climate Change Spatial Planning (Supported by 
Climate Change Team)Dec 2024Embed climate change 
in everything the Council 
does from policy to 
decision makingDeliver the decarbonisation of Council 
owned assets and improve the 
sustainability of the Council’s fleetDevelop robust planning 
policies to deliver 
adaption and mitigation of 
climate changeClimate Change Strategy Action Plan 2022/2024chorley.gov.uk/climatechange 
PRIORITY ACTION LEADCOMPLETION 
DATE
Produce an Infrastructure Delivery Plan which includes new schemes for 
cycling, walking and improved public transport.Spatial Planning Dec 2023 
Deliver the recommendations of the Sustainable Public Transport Overview and 
Scrutiny Task Group.Spatial Planning Dec 2022
In Partnership with LCC, develop a Highways and Transport Masterplan for 
Central Lancashire include a stand- alone Transport Strategy for Chorley to 
support delivery of the 
new Local Plan.Spatial Planning Dec 2022
Produce an Options Paper of sustainable transport initiatives 
for the town centre such as electric bike schemes, park and 
ride schemes, car sharing schemes and enhancement of 
public transport.Spatial Planning Mar 2024
Complete an assessment of the feasibility and demand for electric vehicle 
charge points within the Borough including community facilities and land 
owned not only by the Council and produce a report with options and 
recommendations.Spatial Planning 
(Climate Change Team)
Property Services 
Commercial Services Mar 2023
Investigate the feasibility and business case for the Council to establish a 
service to offer HVO fuel for residents to use in own private vehicles, include 
safety, financial, legal and demand.Spatial Planning 
(Climate Change Team)Dec 2022
Investigate the feasibility, benefits, and costs of delivery of green bus stops. Spatial Planning 
(Climate Change Team 
and Open Dec 2022
Working with the Canal and Rivers Trust develop a programme of potential 
investment in the network in Chorley. Spatial Planning 
(Climate Change Team 
and Open Aug 2022
Develop and publish an EV Infrastructure Strategy to include specific actions 
relating to EV charging and relevant policies.Spatial Planning 
(Climate Change Team)
Commercial ServicesMar 2024
Evaluate existing provision of cycle storage within the town centre and Astley 
park and develop a programme to increase capacity.Spatial Planning 
(Climate Change Team)
Commercial ServicesMar 2023
Undertake a survey about Cycling in Chorley to inform future investment.Spatial Planning 
(Climate Change Team)Dec 2022
Using existing channels such as the Developers Forum and RP Framework, 
cascade and promote new policy such as Future Homes Standard and 
showcase best practices of high-quality low carbon opportunities. Spatial Planning 
(Climate Change Team)Dec 2023 
Support residents to make their properties more energy efficient and affordably 
warm including practical help and advice.Communities Dec 2023
Promote opportunities in access to grant funding for low carbon heating and 
energy.Communities Dec 2023
Produce an options paper to explore all current and emerging low carbon 
technology, potential energy savings, costings, limitations, and identify options 
for the Council. Spatial Planning 
(Climate Change Team)Dec 2022Provide safe spaces for walking and cycling, promote sustainable 
public transport and greener private and commercial vehicles.  Work with housing providers, 
landlords, developers, and 
businesses to promote and 
encourage energy efficiency and 
decarbonisation of buildings.
Climate Change Strategy / 2022 - 2024PRIORITY ACTION LEADCOMPLETION 
DATE
Lobby National Government in writing to ensure low carbon energy, EV 
charging points and increased insulation is available for everyone within 
housing developments. Enabling powers through planning and the white 
paper.Spatial Planning (Carbon 
Change Team)Jul 2022
Investigate the feasibility of small scale renewable energy installation 
programs to home owners across the borough for potential discounts 
and support to homeownersSpatial Planning (Climate 
Change Team)Mar 2023
Publish a waste and recycling strategy for Chorley & South Ribble which 
will guide the Council towards the UK recycling target of 65%Waste Services Streetscene Dec 2022
Increase the number of recycling bins in public spaces based off 
demand and ensure it is recycled effectivelyWaste Services Streetscene Apr 2023
Determine the use of single use plastics within Council assets and level 
of waste generated to identify potential areas of improvement to limit 
plastic waste in the BoroughWaste Services Streetscene Dec 2022
Maximise the reuse and recovery of household bulky waste by 
investigating the donation of white goods and furnitureWaste Services Streetscene Oct 2022
Support community groups to coordinate an annual school uniform swap 
schemes for local familiesSpatial Planning (Carbon 
Change Team)Aug 2022
Aug 2023
Investigate feasibility and potential uptake of reuse schemes including 
keep cup and podback.Spatial Planning (Climate 
Change Team)
Waste Services Dec 2023
Produce and publish an annual carbon audit of the borough to highlight 
areas of improvement within the borough Spatial Planning (Climate 
Change Team)Annually
Draft and publish Climate Change Engagement Strategy with specific 
actions relating to community events, support and advice. Spatial Planning (Carbon 
Change Team)
Communications April 2023
Develop an online ‘Climate Change Handbook’. A collection of 
information for sustainability, detailing organisations and local 
businesses who can support climate change initiatives, recycling, and 
decarbonisation initiativesSpatial Planning (Carbon 
Change Team)
Communications
Business Engagement 
Team July 2022
Deliver staff and Elected member training sessions on Climate Change 
as part of roll out of this strategy.Spatial Planning (Carbon 
Change Team)July 2022
Coordinate and enable community-based and online events, 
campaigns, and training opportunities on a number of topics relating to 
climate change.Spatial Planning (Carbon 
Change Team)
Communications Dec 2024
Work with partners such as Inspire Youth Zone and the Schools to 
develop a programme of learning for young people on climate change.Spatial Planning (Carbon 
Change Team)
CommunicationsDec 2022
Develop a ‘green accreditation’ system for Chorley businesses including 
buildings, which will be universal for all businesses within the Borough. 
This will be a check list system with an overall ratingSpatial Planning (Carbon 
Change Team)
Business Engagement 
Team Dec 2022
Collaborate with local universities for increased research and education 
within the boroughSpatial Planning (Climate 
Change Team) Sept 2023
Deliver the Air Quality Strategy Action plan Communities 
Spatial Planning 
Planning Services Dec 2024
Continue to source available space for wildflower and wildlife corridors 
and ensure these spaces are optimised and maintainedSpatial Planning (Open 
Space Strategy Team)Dec 2024
Deliver the Emergency Tree Action Plan including the target to plant 
116, 875 trees by 2025 Spatial Planning (Open 
Space Strategy Team)Dec 2024
Deliver a comprehensive system to record the baseline of canopy tree 
cover and spatial distribution of the ongoing planting Spatial Planning (Open 
Space Strategy Team & 
Climate Change)Dec 2022
Identify opportunities to work with partners to enhance our rivers, 
improve biodiversity and prevent flood risk Spatial Planning (Open 
Space Strategy Team)July 2021
Hold tree giveaways twice a year for residents to plant their own trees 
upto 2025Spatial Planning (Open 
Space Strategy Team)Annually to 
March 2025Promote 
low carbon 
incentives and 
enable access 
to government 
funding within 
the Borough 
for low carbon 
technology Improve the Borough’s recycling 
rates and work with partners, 
residents, businesses, schools, 
community groups and internally 
to reduce the volume of landfill 
waste produced in the Borough Influence behaviour change by sharing 
knowledge, best practice and promoting 
debate around climate change across all 
groups and ages. Deliver investment and improvements 
in the natural environment including 
waterways, areas of open space, 
natural habitats to deliver an increase 
in the biodiversity of Chorley.
10
chorley.gov.uk/climatechange 
Climate Change Glossary 
Adaptation/Adaption Action that helps cope with the 
effects of climate change - for example construction 
of barriers to protect against rising sea levels, 
or conversion to crops capable of surviving high 
temperatures and drought.
Biodiversity The diversity of life on earth, from genes to 
species to ecosystems.
Biofuel A fuel derived from renewable, biological 
sources, including crops such as maize and sugar 
cane, and some forms of waste.
Carbon capture and storage the collection and 
transport of concentrated carbon dioxide gas from 
large emission sources, such as power plants. The 
gases are then injected into deep underground 
reservoirs. Carbon capture is sometimes referred to as 
geological sequestration.
Carbon dioxide (CO²) Carbon dioxide is a gas in the 
Earth’s atmosphere which occurs naturally and is also 
a by-product of human activities such as burning fossil 
fuels. It is the principal greenhouse gas produced by 
human activity.
Carbon dioxide (CO²) equivalent Six greenhouse 
gases are limited by the Kyoto Protocol and each has a 
different global warming potential. The overall warming 
effect of this cocktail of gases is often expressed in 
terms of carbon dioxide equivalent - the amount of CO² 
that would cause the same amount of warming.
Carbon footprint the amount of carbon emitted by an 
individual or organisation in a given period of time, or 
the amount of carbon emitted during the manufacture 
of a product.
Carbon neutral A process where there is no net release 
of CO². For example, growing biomass takes CO² out of 
the atmosphere, while burning it releases the gas again. 
The process would be carbon neutral if the amount 
taken out and the amount released were identical. A 
company or country can also achieve carbon neutrality 
by means of carbon offsetting.
Carbon offsetting A way of compensating for 
emissions of CO² by participating in, or funding, efforts 
to take CO² out of the atmosphere. Offsetting often 
involves paying another party, somewhere else, to 
save emissions equivalent to those produced by your 
activity.
Carbon sequestration the process of storing carbon 
dioxide. This can happen naturally, as growing trees 
and plants turn CO² into biomass (wood, leaves, and so 
on). It can also refer to the capture and storage of CO² 
produced by industry.
Climate change Changes in average weather 
conditions that persist over multiple decades affecting 
global or regional climate, as measured by yardsticks 
such as average temperature and rainfall, or an 
alteration in frequency of extreme weather conditions. 
This variation may be caused by both natural processes and human activity. Global warming is one aspect of 
climate change.
CO² See carbon dioxide.
Deforestation The permanent removal of standing 
forests that can lead to significant levels of carbon 
dioxide emissions.
Fossil fuels Natural resources, such as coal, oil, and 
natural gas, containing hydrocarbons. These fuels are 
formed in the Earth over millions of years and produce 
carbon dioxide when burnt.
Global average temperature The mean surface 
temperature of the Earth measured from three main 
sources: satellites, monthly readings from a network of 
over 3,000 surface temperature observation stations 
and sea surface temperature measurements taken 
mainly from the fleet of merchant ships, naval ships and 
data buoys.
Global energy budget the balance between the Earth’s 
incoming and outgoing energy. The current global 
climate system must adjust to rising greenhouse gas 
levels and, in the very long term, the Earth must get rid 
of energy at the same rate at which it receives energy 
from the sun.
Global warming the steady rise in global average 
temperature in recent decades, which experts believe 
is largely caused by man-made greenhouse gas 
emissions. The long-term trend continues upwards, 
they suggest, even though the warmest year on record, 
according to the UK’s Met Office, is 1998. 
Global warming the observed increase in average 
temperature near the Earth’s surface and in the lowest 
layer of the atmosphere. In common usage, “global 
warming” often refers to the warming that has occurred 
as a result of increased emissions of greenhouse gases 
from human activities. Global warming is a type of 
climate change; it can also lead to other changes in 
climate conditions, such as changes in precipitation 
patterns.
Green Bus Stops Green bus stops are specifically 
designed to alleviate the heat intensity and improve the 
air quality at a bus stop. Features can include a  layer 
of plants which act as a shade for the bus stop’s roof 
and will absorb the heat for evapotranspiration, thus 
reducing the ambient temperature and the amount of 
heat radiated to commuters.They provide a habitat 
for many small pollinating creatures, and improving 
biodiversity. They also provide visual amenity and can 
include solar powered lighting.
Greenhouse gases that absorb heat in the atmosphere 
near the Earth’s surface, preventing it from escaping 
into space. If the atmospheric concentrations of these 
gases rise, the average temperature of the lower 
atmosphere will gradually increase, a phenomenon 
known as the greenhouse effect. Greenhouse gases 
include, for example, carbon dioxide, water vapor, 
and methane.Climate Change Strategy / 2022 - 2024
Greenhouses effect the insulating effect of certain 
gases in the atmosphere, which allow solar radiation  
to warm the earth and then prevent some of the heat 
from escaping. 
HVO Hydrogenated vegetable oil, a biofuel derived from 
used cooking oils, residual fats from food processing 
and non-food grade crops. Used as an alternative to 
conventional diesel. 
Invasive species A non-native organism whose 
introduction within a particular ecosystem causes or 
is likely to cause economic or environmental harm, 
or harm to human, animal, or plant health.
IPCC The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
is a scientific body established by the United Nations 
Environment Programme and the World Meteorological 
Organization. It reviews and assesses the most recent 
scientific, technical, and socio-economic work relevant 
to climate change, but does not carry out its own 
research.
Kyoto Protocol A protocol attached to the UN 
Framework Convention on Climate Change, which 
sets legally binding commitments on greenhouse 
gas emissions.
Methane Methane is the second most important 
man-made greenhouse gas. Sources include both 
the natural world (wetlands, termites, wildfires) and human activity (agriculture, waste dumps, leaks from coal 
mining).
Mitigation Action that will reduce man-made climate 
change. This includes action to reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions or absorb greenhouse gases in the atmosphere.
Ozone Layer A colourless gas consisting of three atoms 
of oxygen, readily reacting with many other substances. 
Ozone in the upper atmosphere protects the Earth from 
harmful levels of ultraviolet radiation from the Sun. In the 
lower atmosphere ozone is an air pollutant with harmful 
effects on human health.
Resilience A capability to anticipate, prepare for, respond 
to, and recover from significant multi-hazard threats with 
minimum damage to social well-being, the economy, and 
the environment
Risk Risks are threats to life, health and safety, the 
environment, economic well-being, and other things of 
value. Risks are often evaluated in terms of how likely they 
are to occur (probability) and the damages that would 
result if they did happen (consequences).
Renewable energy Renewable energy is energy created 
from sources that can be replenished in a short period 
of time. The five renewable sources used most often are: 
biomass (such as wood and biogas), the movement of 
water, geothermal (heat from within the earth), wind, 
and solar.
chorley.gov.uk/climatechange Resources
Chorley Council Carbon Footprint Report 2021
Add link when published 
Chorley Council Clean Air Strategy
https://democracy.chorley.gov.uk/documents/s122081/Appendix%201%20for%20Clean%20Air%20Strategy.pdf
The 25-year environment plan
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/693158/25-year-
environment-plan.pdf
The Clean Growth Strategy Leading the way to a low carbon future
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/700496/clean-
growth-strategy-correction-april-2018.pdf
The Clean Air Strategy 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/clean-air-strategy-2019/clean-air-strategy-2019-executive-summary
The ten point plan for a green industrial revolution
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/the-ten-point-plan-for-a-green-industrial-revolution
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) 
Reports — IPCC