 
 
  Lincoln 
 Climate 
 Commission 
 
April 2020 – Update on Lincoln Climate Commission 
 
Climate Declarations  
• University of Lincoln declared a climate emergency in May 2019 and have since 
been working to develop an appropriate medium and long-term carbon 
reduction target, including a programme for Education for Sustainable 
Development. 
• City of Lincoln Council passed a motion by full council to declare a Climate and 
Environmental emergency in July 2019. A copy of the declaration can be 
viewed here The motion commits to working with key stakeholders to achieve 
an aspiration, area wide target of net carbon zero by 2030. 
• Within Lincolnshire North Kesteven, West Lindsey, East Lindsey, South 
Holland district councils also declared a climate emergency in 2019 and are 
developing action plans during 2020. 
• Lincolnshire County Council (LCC) have committed to their organisation being 
carbon neutral by 2050 and recognise the urgent need for action. Whilst having 
not declared a climate emergency the council still understand the pressing and 
urgent need for action. It is estimated that LCC as an organisation currently 
emit 0.7% of Lincolnshire’s total CO2 emissions in 2017 and are developing a 
Green masterplan to set out how they are going to achieve their carbon 
reduction ambition. 
 
 
Membership 
 At the commission meeting in September 2019 the group agreed that an 
application process for membership onto the commission would give the group 
more credibility and ensure a longer term commitment from representatives. It 
was agreed that Lincoln would follow the model set out by the Leeds Climate 
Commission and invite 8 representatives from the private sector, 8 from the 
public sector and 8 from the 3rd/community sectors. As the commission 
develops it is likely that there will need to be a range of themed delivery groups 
which report to the commission, i.e. Energy, Transport etc.  
 In January 2020 an online application form was set up and is available at 
www.lincoln.gov.uk/climatecommission  .  A selection panel, made up of the 
Delivery group, has been agreed and will review applications and select 
members. Although timescales have been disrupted by Covid-19 measures, 
the selection panel aims to make the appointments by the end of May 2020. 
 The events planned during March and April to promote LCC membership more 
widely have had to be cancelled. To date 23 applications have been received 
and these are evenly spread across all sectors. 
 
 
Funding 
 It is acknowledged that funding is required to deliver stakeholder consultation 
events and a possible citizens assembly 
 The delivery group have submitted funding applications to various sources to 
support communication projects with schools/community but have so far been 
unsuccessful, the group will continue to secure funding in 2020.  
 
 In March 2020  the Commission secured some support from the Place-based 
Climate Action Network (PCAN) to enable a website, communications material 
and a road-map template for both Lincoln City and Lincolnshire. 
 
Climate Action Plan 
 A draft roadmap to net zero carbon for Lincoln by 2030 was presented to the 
LCC at the meeting in September 2019 and circulated for comment.  The 
roadmap provides carbon projections for Lincoln across a range of sources, 
domestic gas, domestic electricity, minor roads etc. The roadmap identifies 
gaps in the projected emissions towards net carbon zero between 2020 and 
2030 (primarily based on Gov’t Policy) and identifies CO2 emission sources 
that the commission will need to focus in order to achieve the net zero target. 
 SCATTER’s emission pathways functionality tool was published in March and 
will be used in the action plan to guide the level of local intervention required to 
meet the emissions target. More info at https://scattercities.com/  
 Propose that we set up a working group to focus on the Lincoln Climate Action 
Plan (previously progressed through the delivery group but now requires more 
focussed working group to progress this). If you would like to be involved in this 
working group please contact Kate Bell (kate.bell@lincoln.gov.uk) 
 
Community Consultation 
 In January 2020, the Chamber of Commerce and City of Lincoln Council 
completed a Climate Change survey with members/residents to establish local 
understanding of the implications of climate change and the need for a wide 
range of national and local actions.  The chamber of commerce results show 
that businesses are engaged in the climate agenda and overwhelmingly 
supportive of the need for action. 88% of Lincoln residents support local 
solutions to address climate change, alongside national policies. A summary of 
survey results and the council’s response to comments can be viewed here 
 Consultation events with business (to be hosted by the Chamber of Commerce) 
and the community sectors were due to take place during March and April, with 
a larger world café style event in May (to be hosted by the University of Lincoln) 
in order to start the conversation and consultation on local climate action.  
Discussion and feedback from these events will form part of the Lincoln Climate 
Action Plan.  
 Due to Covid-19 face to face events have been temporarily suspended and the 
communication working group are currently planning virtual events over the 
coming months to ensure that the conversations about climate change 
continue. 
 
Communications 
 Our Communications delivery group are continuing to meet virtually and are 
currently working on setting up an independent website for the commission. 
Please email lincolnclimatecommission@gmail.com  if you would like to be 
more involved with this group.  
 You can follow news about the Lincoln Climate Commission on Facebook , 
Instagram  and our Twitter page. 
 
 
Response to Local/National Policies 
 Future Homes Standard Consultation – Jan 2020 
 Lincoln Transport Strategy workshops and consultations during 2019. 
Published by Lincolnshire CC in March 2020.  
 
 Decarbonising Transport – consultation launched at the end of March 2020 and 
is expected to be completed by the end of 2020. 
 Greater Lincolnshire Local Enterprise Partnership Energy Strategy  published in 
July 2019 and working with the GLLEP to delivery strategy goals 
 Input into existing networks within Greater Lincolnshire to deliver local policies 
and strategies with Climate Change as priority, ie Housing Infrastructure Group, 
Energy Steering Group etc.  
Next Steps 
 Develop Lincoln Climate Commission Website, Logo, Social Media and 
circulate to existing contacts as well as promote more widely. 
 Appoint the members of the Lincoln Climate Commission, based on the 
applications received by the end of May 2020 
 Future work for the commission (once appointed): 
o Prioritise Community Consultation and Climate Action Plan 
o Input into the review of the Central Lincolnshire Local Plan – due to be 
completed in 2021. 
o Develop a Climate resiliance (adaptation) Plan for Lincoln/Lincolnshire. 
 