 
 
Report  for: Cabinet  
Date of meeting:  20 Octob er 2020  
Part: 1 
If Part II, reason:   
 
Title of report:  Climate Change Emergency Progress Update  
Contact:  Councillor Andrew Williams , Leader of the Council  and 
Portfolio Holder for Corporate and Contract ed Services   
 
Author/Responsible Officer  – Mark Gaynor, Corporate 
Director Housing and Regeneration  
Purpose of report:  The purpose of this report is to  provide an update on the 
progress of the Council’s work to tackle the climate 
emergency and to  report the feedback from the Strategic 
Planning and Environment Overview and Scrutiny 
Committee .   
Recommendations  
to Cabinet 
20 October  That Cabinet note and approve:  
 
1. The progress on actions and approach to key issues as 
set out in the report with the inclusion  of any changes 
and additions that Cabinet are minded to accept 
following the feedback from the September  29 
Strategic Planning and Environment Overview and 
Scrutiny  meeting  (shown as Appendix 1) .  
 
2. That a further progress report be submitted to Cabinet 
in February 2021 . 
 
3. That the proposal to establish a Green Community 
Grant scheme, as set out in paragraph 6.3.3 of the 
report, be approved  to be  funded from the £75,000 
Climate budget already established.  
Period for post 
policy/project 
review  The Strategy and Action Plan will ultimately be reviewed in 
2030 but it is proposed that there should be an annual 
‘state of the environment’ report made to Cabinet and 
Council setting out the progress made in the previous 12 
months and measured against the baseline ca rbon dioxide 
and greenhouse gas position together with the specific 
targets and actions for the forthcoming year. In addition 
there will be periodic reporting to both Cabinet and the 
Strategic Planning and Environment Overview and  Scrutiny Committee.  
Corp orate 
objectives:  The Council’s Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan 
will help to support all 5 corporate objectives:  
 
 Safe and clean environment: e.g. contains actions 
relating to the quality of existing environments and 
design and layout of new develo pment that promote 
security and safe access;  
 Community Capacity: e.g. provide a framework for 
local communities to be better informed and involved in 
climate emergency mitigation;  
 New and Affordable housing: through both direct 
delivery and setting improve d sustainability 
requirements in new homes would help to reduce both 
the cost of energy and water and the carbon dioxide 
(CO2) emissions the homes would produce;  
 Dacorum delivers: fulfilling the zero carbon pledge will 
make a huge contribution to local sus tainability and 
assist in the national target to reach zero carbon as a 
nation by 2050;  
 Regeneration: the strategy and action plan will provide 
improvements to air quality, biodiversity, and 
opportunities for cycling and walking as well as major 
economic p otential for ‘green’ businesses.  
Implications:  
 
 
 
 
‘Value for money’ 
implications  Financial  
 
The financial implications of achieving the strategy are not 
as yet fully costed but will be factored in to the Medium 
Term Financial Strategy and subsequent bud geting. Some 
areas will procure and use alternative products, materials 
and services which may be more expensive, others adapt 
ways of operating, and for others such as the regulatory 
services the cost will fall to the private sector. One clear 
factor is t hat failure to act will have both financial and 
societal impacts which will be far more damaging and 
expensive.  
 
There is budget for the Climate Change  Emergency  Officer  
and a further £75,000 available for 2020/21  together with 
an earmarked reserve.    
 
Value for money  
 
The aim of the Climate Emergency Strategy and Action 
Plan is to reduce the carbon footprint of the Council’s 
activities and whilst in procurement the Council will seek 
value for money through intelligent procurement and 
tendering a critical p art of the value for money assessment 
must be the degree to which the expenditure acts to 
reduce net CO2 and other greenhouse emissions  
Risk implications  A Risk Assessment  will be  completed  and added to the 
Council’s Strategic Risk Register   Community I mpact 
Assessment  A full community impact assessment will be carried out 
following Cabinet’s consideration of this report.  
Health and safety 
Implications  Failure to act on the climate emergency would be 
damaging to the health and safety of all who work and  live 
in the Borough. Action is required to mitigate the impact of 
our changing climate and day to day weather – flooding, 
drought, excessive temperatures and so on. There would 
also be severe impacts on air quality, ecological well -being 
and overall quali ty of life  
Monitoring Officer/  
S.151 Officer  
Comments  Monitoring Officer  
 
No comments to add to the report.  
 
S151 Officer  
 
The initiatives recommended within this report can be met 
through existing budgets.  
Consultees:  
 Association of Public Service E xcellence  
Corporate Management Team  
Strategic Planning and Environment Overview and 
Scrutiny Committee 29/9/20  
Background 
papers:  Cabinet Report Climate Change Emergency Strategy and 
Action plan 19/5/20 , and 23/6/20  
Glossary of 
acronyms and any 
other abb reviations 
used in this report:  CO2 Carbon Dioxide  
APSE Association for Public Service Excellence  
HRA Housing Revenue Account  
CSG Clean Safe and Green  
MTFS Medium Term Financial Strategy  
EPC Energy Performance Certificate  
PV Solar Photovoltaics  
BREEAM Bui lding Research Establishment Environmental   
Assessment Method  
PSH Private Sector Housing  
PRS Private Rented Sector  
HMO House in Multiple Occupation  
CAVAT Capital Asset Valuation of Amenity Trees  
AQAP Air Quality Action Plan  
AQMA Air Quality Management Are a 
LDS Local Development Scheme (Local Plan)  
LGA Local Government Association  
DCN District Council Network    
 
1. Background  
 
1.1 Cabinet received and approved a report on the draft strategy and action plan 
on 23 June following consideration by the Strategic Planning and Environment 
Overview and Scrutiny Committee and the Housing and Community Overview 
and Scrutiny Committee. This confirmed the Council’s commitment to achieving 
net zero carbon for the Scope 1 and 2 emissions resulting from its service 
delivery  and operations by the end of 2030. It also agreed a net zero position 
on the Scope 3 emissions arising from the 10,250 Council homes it provides by 
2050 recognising that given current budgets, financial restrictions and the absence at this point of reliab le and affordable alternatives to gas this will be a 
longer process.  
 
1.2 This report sets out the progress made to date and the shorter term actions 
that officers will be taking along with the preparation for the implementation of 
the overall action plan.  The Strategic Planning and Environment Overview and 
Scrutiny Committee consider ed this report at their meeting of 29 September 
and its comments are set out at Appendix One.  It is important to note that  the 
intention is to deliver many of these  changes ac ross every service and that the  
majority of  delivery will be through the service plans  and actions  and via the 
MTFS and annual budgeting process. There will be cross service actions and 
corporate ambitions that will also be delivered. Tackling the climate emergency 
is everyone’s business and is not be seen as an ‘add on’.  Whilst there will be 
some ‘quick wins’ much of the work will be medium and longer term  where 
progress will inevitably be more gradual.  
 
1.3 This report sets out:  
      The officer arrangements for bringing forward the actions required  
 Continued work on finalising the Strategy and Action Plan (though the 
latter will be continuously reviewed and updated)  
 Progress made on the key areas to date and  future actions being 
progressed  
 Key actions that ar e of a more immediate nature .  
 
1.4 Key actions required and being followed up  
 It is recommended that tacking the Climate Change Emergency should 
be added to the Council’s other five corporate priorities but that it be 
recognised that it will be delivered across the whole Council and involve 
all services rather than a stand -alone matter ; 
 It is essential that t he data collection processes  are adapted and 
enhanced to be fit for the new purposes of delivering on the climate 
emergency;  
 Work is being completed on the  initial  Action Plan, which will be to the 
point and effective , and embarking on the work associated with its 
delivery;  
 Develop a programme of energy efficiency works in relation to its  General 
Fund  buildings, part funded by Salix  or other available g rant, that will 
deliver reduced emissions and capture savings on the running costs of 
the Council’s buildings;  
 Developing a clear approach to carbon offsetting – the baseline work by 
APSE Energy confirmed that some level of offsetting will be necessary to 
achieve zero carbon by 2030. This could be delivered in a variety of ways 
which may include substantial tree planting in the Borough or, more 
immediately, through embarking on and investing in a re newable energy 
project of commercial size  that would p ut the Council in a workable and 
commanding position regarding offsetting, as well as earning it vital 
income into the future;  
 Put in place community arrangements to start moving the outward facing 
part of the climate emergency declaration forwards i.e. the per suasion of 
the partners representing the local community to act likewise   Continuing to work with the County Council, and other key partners, for a 
pan Hertfordshire approach to climate change and the climate 
emergency . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. Progress Report  
 
2.1 Updated St rategy Paper  
 
We are currently working with an APSE consultant to provide an updated 
strategy paper which will suggest further  actions that will help guide us to reach 
the commitments laid out in the Climate Emergency declaration. This strategy 
work is in  progress and is expected to be completed in the next few weeks.  
 
2.2 Data collection and analysis  
 
Having received the carbon footprint report from APSE energy it is crucial that 
the Council  commit to overhauling the data collection processes in place in the 
Council and ensuring that these are fit for the new purposes of delivering on 
the climate emergency. This is vital to monitor the impact on the interventions 
that the Council implements though its Climate emergency work and to assist 
in the process of assessing the options most likely to deliver the best results. 
Whilst the Council does collect data required for ISO14001 it needs a more 
through and sophisticated process of monitoring going forward. It is only 
through thorough data collection and analysi s that assurance can be made on 
the progress made. This will need to extend to the emissions that are produced 
by our contractors.  
 
This will require services to ensure that this data is required in new contracts 
and in areas where there are any gaps in da ta collection in our own services. 
This will require an increase in staff resource , working to the Climate 
Emergency Officer , for the next financial year 2021/22  which will be considered 
as part of the budget process .    
 
2.3 Sustainability Impact Assessme nt development  
 
A Sustainability Impact Assessment (SIA) document is currently being drafted, 
which will ultimately be implemented into existing project development policy 
and in all reports to Cabinet. The SIA will explore how a proposed project will 
have  an impact on the environment and use a criteria to give a rating. The 
report will explore elements such as carbon emissions and the affect this will 
have on our net -zero targets. All SIAs will need to be sent for internal approval 
before the project can b e approved to progress. It might be that a project will 
need to reconsider a greener alternative to reduce its impact on the 
environment before it is given approval.  
 
This method is currently already in use by many other local authorities.  
 Once the SIA h as been developed throughout Quarter 3, there will be a soft 
launch alongside both staff and member training which will take place in 
Quarter 4. Feedback will be collated and any adjustments that need to be 
made will be taken into account with the expectat ion that a finalised SIA would 
be ready for use ready by Quarter 1 2021/22.  
 
2.4 Member and Officer Climate Emergency Training  
 
A full day of Carbon Literacy Training will be taking place for the certain staff 
who are heavily involved in climate change wor k, such as chairs and vice -
chairs of the Climate Emergency sub -groups and other key staff who will be 
selected by the Assistant Directors.  
 
Half day training courses on the Climate Emergency and Dacorum’s strategy 
will be created and delivered by the new Climate Emergency and Sustainability 
Programme Lead Officer. These will be available for other key members of staff 
to be determined by Assistant Directors and Group Managers and also 
available for Members. This training will be delivered in Quarter 4.  We will aim 
to run internal training concurrently with SIA training.  
 
2.5 Officer Climate Groups  
  
The main actions to combat the Climate Emergency will take place across the 
Council but will have a focus on the areas which either have the greatest 
carbon em issions outputs to reduce or the greatest potential to deliver a more 
sustainable future. With this in mind, one core climate group, four sub -groups 
and a co -ordinating group have been established:  
 Housing and Built Assets   
This will incorporate new build Council Homes, action to improve the 
energy efficiency and carbon output from our existing Council Homes, 
and similar improvements to our General Fund built assets.  
 Planning  
This will focus on the Climate Change Mitigation requirements of new 
development through the Local Plan. It will also take responsibility for 
biodiversity, green energy and environmental requirements in the Local 
Plan.  
 Environmental Services   
Work here will be split between the Waste and the biodiversity/land 
management elements.  
 Com munity and Communications  
This will involve a transformation of our web facility o n Climate 
Emergency and Sustainability, the running of any campaigns and 
initiatives, as well as achieving community outreach with interested 
groups and residents.  
 
The co -ordinating group will meet a week before the meeting of the Core Group 
and will be made up of the Chairs of the sub -groups, the Climate Emergency 
Officer and the Corporate Director Housing and Regeneration. It is important to 
stress that while the four sub -groups will pursue their action plan there are 
interconnections between all of these actions not least in terms of timing and 
finance.  
 All of the sub -groups have been established and had their first meetings with 
actions already getting underway.  
 
3. Housi ng and Built Assets  
 
3.1 In Housing  Property and Place  are exploring/considering actions in relation to 
carbon reductions to help the climate emergency objectives : 
 Health Check of our current stock condition data (our asset management 
data base), potential  new survey required which can be tailored to suit 
our need to encompass energy, renewables and landscaping measures 
on the tenure,  
 Purchase software (IT system) to map E nergy Performance Certificate  
data and energy consumption  – options were  considered fr om the 
specialists Building Research Establishment and the Energy Savings 
Trust  with the latter offering the best fit for the Council’s requirements . 
This in turn will give us options on ways to best tackle carbon reductions 
with a number of said intervent ions with envisaged capital cost, whilst 
considering future energy bills to the end users, this is really exciting stuff  
 Identifying a small pilot scheme to monitor the impact of carbon reduction 
measures with a supplier - this is at its infancy,  
 Formally commission ing the architectural and M echanical and 
Engineering  Design  work for  the potential expansion of the existing bio 
mass boiler system at Summer Court to extend over the road to the flats 
on Church Street, basically this will be a phase two of that  original 
refurbishment project,  
 Properties which  were down for external cladding refurbishment over the 
next 18 months will now be considered  for external wall insulation , new 
roofs (possible solar inclusion) and windows with enhanced ventilation,  
 Consid eration following  an options appraisal on a re-think  refurbishment 
solution to large complex es of flats which have numerous problems  to 
include:  
o Carbon reduction measures  
o Fuel poverty  
o Communal heating source  
o Substructure refurb, various elements  
o Measures to tackle anti -social behaviour  
o Landscaping options  
 Currently exploring a trial estate for a domestic landscaping survey on 
trees within HRA tenure  
 
3.2 Energy grant applications:  
 
Two have been made - the first is for financial support,  the second for su pport  
on effective options . 
 
The Green Homes Grant Local Authorities Delivery Scheme (GH G LAD). The 
grants are available for upgrading lower EPC rated properties, those in E,  F, 
and G bandings , and are targeted at households with incomes below £30K. 
The fu nding is available capped at £5K per property, and with a minimum 
anticipated expenditure of the grant funding or £500K, which has to be spent 
by 31 March 2021. DBC have applied as part of a consortium bid with Watford and hope to secure £50K funding towar ds the external wall insulation scheme, 
which is being delivered this year.  
 
The second is the Expression of Interest for Public Sector Estate – Energy 
Efficiency and Decarbonisation Support, Greater South East Energy Hub.  
 
The Greater South East Hub is a rranging for support and modelling tools to be 
made available on a prioritised basis to help public sector organisations identify 
energy efficiency/clean heat/renewable generation measures across their own 
estate. The Energy Hub aims to support public sect or organisations to be ‘bid 
ready’ to access the UK government’s Public Sector Decarbonisation Fund in 
due course. The expression of interest is focused on Council owned community 
buildings, a waste depot and General Fund housing being used for Temporary 
Accommodation. We have also included a number of HRA sheltered schemes 
which may possibly be eligible due to the nature of the needs of the 
households living there.   
 
The Council has recently become a member of the UK Green Building Council 
which is an ind ustry led network committed to radically improve the 
sustainability of the built environment.   
 
3.3 Housing Development  
 
The Council’s new build programme already ensures a high level of energy 
efficiency is achieved above the former Sustainable Housing C ode Level 4. We 
have developed to Passivhaus standard on one scheme and the focus is on 
developing a revised standard which will be considerably higher than Code 
level 4 and potentially higher than the proposed Future Homes Standard. As 
with all such impro vements in standards there will be a balance between the 
ideal standard and that which can be reasonably afforded.       
 
3.4 New Build Climate Change Action Plan  
 
The current work programme includes the following actions:   
 A review of previous projects a nd capture of lessons learnt.  
 Capture benefits / performance of our current schemes.  
 Establish a minimum DBC standard for new builds going forward with the 
aim of exceeding this where practicable.  
 Review our Design Guide and Employers Requirement to identi fy 
possible improvements including materials specified. This will include 
advantages in CO2 reductions in the manufacturing and completion of 
homes produced via off site manufacturing.   
 A Review and update of the current Energy & Sustainability Strategy  
 Update the Project Management Handbook to the improved requirements 
are embedded  
 Review BREEAM standard to see how this can best be adopted  
 Track improvements coming through Building Regulations and revise 
requirements accordingly  
 Resolve the issue of a lac k of interest by private EV operators in being 
prepared to manage charging points for flatted developments due to the 
lack of commercial return given the very low number of social housing 
tenants with electric vehicles. We already install the capacity to i ntroduce charging points in such developments and provide charging facilities in 
houses with off road parking.  
 Understand how we capture evidence of in use performance and resident 
experience / awareness and, where non gas based heating solutions are 
used such as Air/Ground source heat pumps, to provide Training and 
support to tenants to maximise the potential.   
 
4. Strategic Planning and Environment  
 
4.1 This work  stream is largely focused on the Local Plan which is nearing its 
completion for public consult ation . The Local Plan is key to being able to 
ensure that future development is a low carbon as it can be and promotes 
energy and resource efficiency. The aims within the plan are ambitious and 
once approved will make a big impact on reducing the Borough’s  carbon 
footprint.  
 
4.2 The Local Plan is bound by the requirements of Planning Law and government 
guidance which attempts to create a balance between achieving a net zero 
carbon UK by 2050 and developer viability, the latter causing a potential 
restricti on the levels of carbon efficiency to be required. There are a number of 
parallel developments in government policy which will have a bearing on how 
far we can increase the standards above the current levels specifically the 
Future Homes Standard. This wil l be delivered as a Building Control 
requirements at levels considerably higher than the old Code Level 4 and 
should be in force relatively quickly. One proposal in the Future Homes 
Standard is to prevent Local Planning Authorities from imposing higher 
requirements than the new standard through their Local Plans. As this seems 
contrary to national target of zero carbon by 2050 it is hoped that MHCLG drop 
this and allow the highest energy efficiency standards and low/zero carbon 
development to be incorporate d into Local Plans and ongoing development 
management.  
 
4.3 The government has also issued a Planning White Paper which will 
recommend major changes to the planning system which may add further 
complications to the completion of the Local Plan.  
 
4.4 In vie w of this uncertainty, and to p rovide additional detail to the Council’s 
ongoing Local Plan, we will produce a Supplementary Planning Document 
specifically on Climate Emergency Mitigation where the standards can be more 
specific and to the maximum permitte d in reducing carbon emissions both in 
the construction and ongoing habitation.    
 
5. Current position of Climate Change and Emergency mitigation in the draft 
Local Plan  
 
5.1 Set out below in Table One are the key elements of the future planning position 
in the Local Plan which, as indicated, will be augmented by a Supplementary 
Planning Document where greater detail can be included.  
 
5.2 Table One    
Climate change policy  Purpose  Comments/action  
SP Climate Change Overarching strategic policy Carbon emission targets Mitigation  setting out range of 
measures in the Plan that 
contribute to climate change 
and emissions reductions for 
new development up to 2030 
and net zero from 2030  may be superseded by 
Future Homes Standard 
and White Paper 2025 
requirements  
Sustainable Design and 
Construction  Requirement for majors to 
submit sustainability 
statement demonstrating that 
the Plan’s mitigation and 
adaptation principles have 
been satisfied. For non -res, 
this is waived for BREEAM 
excellent including ongoing 
commitment to BREEAM 
certification  To be expanded within 
Climate Change and 
Sustainability SPD  
Energy and Carbon 
Emissions Reductions in 
New Development  Submit evidence that energy 
efficiency standards in new 
development up to 2030 are 
as a minimum 19% below 
target plus major residential 
to contribute towards a 
further 20%, and non -
residential BREEAM 
excellent, and support for 
retrofitting  May be superseded by 
Future Homes Standard 
and White Paper 2025 
requirements  
Low carbon community 
heat and energy 
networks  Majo r proposals to either 
create a site -wide community 
heat or energy network or 
connect to an existing 
decentralised network (or 
better alternative)  
 
We have also commissioned 
an energy mapping study by 
BEIS, which shows areas of 
high energy usage which 
could benefit from district 
heating or  other 
decarbonisation measures  Requires further and up to 
date evidence, including 
full range of electricity 
generation options and 
battery storage  
Stand -alone Renewable 
or Low Carbon Energy  Protects AONB, landscape, 
wildlife and residential 
amenity from impact of these 
measures and ensure 
community led schemes 
genuinely benefit 
communities  Further guidance to follow 
within Climate Change 
and Sustainability SPD  
Carbon offsetting  Development to contribute to 
carbon off -setting fund if it 
can’t meet the Plans 
greenhouse gas reduction 
requirements, other schemes Further guidance on 
collection and operation of 
carbon off -set fund to be 
provid ed  that reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions may be accepted, 
subject to meeting criteria.  
 
5.3 Climate Change mitigation in the draft Local Plan is also supported by policies 
in 
 Environment and biodiversity  
 Healthy communities  
 Transport  
 Delivering great places (design and heritage)  
 
5.4 In addition the following initiatives are being devel oped:  
 Working on a Business Plan for the ‘Beryl Bike’ scheme – an initiative to 
provide bicycle and E bicycle options to travel from Hemel Station to 
Maylands to reduce reliance on cars -   following instruction from CMT to 
look at longer term funding (rat her than a 12 month pilot)  
 Continue working with the Go Travel sustainable transport work for the 
Maylands area  
 Finalised a feasibility study for Working Place Parking Levy to help 
provide long term funding for sustainable transport which Members will be 
able to consider in due course    
 Completed work on sustainable transport for Tring and Berkhamsted to 
support the Infrastructure Delivery Plan.  
 Commissioned the same work for Hemel Hempstead   
 The Herts Growth Board bid includes bids for funding for feas ibility on 
local energy production and improved connectivity within Hemel Garden 
Communities  
 
6. Communications and Community  
 
6.1 Engaging with the community will be an  imperative part of the Climate 
Emergency work in order to educate, encourage and enable  our residents as 
well as local organisations and businesses to reduce their impact on the 
environment. A range of different projects, activities and events will be required 
in order to help reduce the carbon emissions of the borough which are outside 
of Dacorum’s control.  
 
6.2 A comprehensive communications strategy will be created once Dacorum’s 
Climate Emergency Strategy and Action plan has been finalised though 
preparatory work has already started. Some of these activities, such as 
marketing campaigns will need to be in response to external triggers and 
timelines – for example, the Green Homes Grant scheme which has been 
recently launched by central Government. Other activities can work alongside 
our own strategies and plans – such as tree planting even ts.   
 
6.3 Set out below are some of the projects we propose that we have been, or will 
be, working on in the coming months.  
 
6.3.1  Learning from Lockdown – Sustainability Survey  
 
We have been running a short online sustainability survey throughout July a nd 
August to understand how lockdown has affected people's habits, hobbies and daily routines. The aim is to identify how DBC can embrace any positive 
changes that could help to benefit the environment as well as our communities. 
The results of this survey  – which attracted nearly 1500 responders - will be 
made available by the end of September 2020 and will be passed on to teams 
internally that will be able to make use of this information to help guide their 
future work in the community. The main findings  are still being analysed but 
will be made available in the next few weeks.  
 
6.3.2  Energy Efficiency Campaigns  
 
The intention here is to make it easier for residents to be aware of and take 
advantage of the schemes which are already available, and those wh ich follow. 
The level of Council involvement will depend on the aims and rules of the 
schemes. For most it will be information provision, for others there may be the 
need for more direct advice and where the Council itself is eligible for financial 
support  we will evaluate then make use of it as effectively as we can. Existing 
examples include:  
 
 Green Homes Grant voucher scheme .  
o This scheme  allows home -owners and landlords t o claim up to £5000 
(or £10,000 for low -income homes) of vouchers for energy efficiency 
improvements in their homes. The vouchers need to be used by March 
2021.  
 ECO Scheme  
o This scheme  allows certain eligible residents to be able to have 
efficiency improvements in their homes. There is no end date.  
o Generic and targeted marketing campaigns aimed at both residents 
and landlords wil l be rolled out highlighting both schemes throughout 
Autumn and Winter 2020.  
o Loaning out thermal cameras  to residents (scheme to be approved 
and established. E.g. https://sustainablestalbans.o rg/thermal -imaging/ ) 
 
6.3.3  Direct Council involvement  
 
 Green Community Grants  
 It is proposed that £10,000 worth of community grant funding will be 
made available (from the £75,000 budget for 2020/21) to environmental 
groups (or groups proposing an initi ative with a clear Climate Change 
mitigation impact) within Dacorum before March 2021. If judged to be 
successful this could be repeated in subsequent years budget allowing.  
A maximum of £2000 will be awarded per group.  
o This scheme is to be developed and launched in Q3 with the 
funding being provided in Q4.  
o If it continues it is proposed that this becomes a regular grant with 
several application rounds throughout the year Please note this is 
not the same scheme as the existing community grants that are 
available.  
 
 Climate Emergency - Public Consultation   
The public are more likely to be engaged in a strategy that they have 
been able to give feedback into. Once Dacorum’s Climate Emergency 
Strategy and Action plan has been finalised we would like to open up a public consultation and potentially host an online or physical event in 
order to get feedback help shape potential actions. Attendees could be a 
mix of residents, businesses, organisations, councillors and council staff 
in a format aimed at asking the gr oup to give views on ways to make 
proposed initiatives to be best delivered. It would not be a standing group 
and it would be clear that this was to improve delivery and not to make 
the final decisions on what the Council will do – that is for Members to 
decide. It could include:  
   
o Producing a short marketing and information video in order to help 
promote the consultation and increase engagement available on the 
Council’s website for any individuals or groups who may be 
interested.  
o Delivering a presentati on on the feedback from this as part of the 
consultation event referred to above.  The information will be used to 
help guide future initiatives and campaigns.  
 
 Establish a “Dacorum’s Climate Action Network” (DacorumCAN)  
Such a network would encourage indi viduals and members of various 
environmental community groups to work together to share experiences 
and best practice, have common goals, avoid repetition of effort and act 
as a volunteer hub.  
o Those who wish to be involved could sign up to a mailing list so that 
we can contact them regarding future initiatives, projects, activities 
and events.  
 
 Annual Climate Emergency evening : 
o Yearly face -to-face element of DacorumCAN.  
o Opportunity to give a presentation to attendees updating on what 
has been achieved in the past year by DBC and what is on the 
agenda for the year ahead  
o Other key community groups can give updates on what they have 
done – share  best practise and experiences.  
o Awards ceremony for Green Community Grant  
o Networking opportunity for local groups  
o Guest speakers and presentations  
 
 Training  
Climate Emergency training will be made available to staff and members 
before the end of March 2021.  
 
 Environmental events and training  
o Events such as Community Tree Planting, Community Talks and 
Training, Clothes Swaps, Repair Cafés, Educational film nights can 
be planned and delivered once it is safe to do so without the threat 
of COVID -19 having an impact.  
o Research the potential of environmental courses - potentially 
subsidised by DBC – could be delivered as webi nars or physically.  
 
 Annual Surveys  In order to capture information on the behaviour of our residents, a short 
annual survey would help us monitor and report on community progress. 
To facilitate this we could:  
o Make available a  quick carbon footprint moni toring tool (we could 
partner with a company that has one of these designed already – 
e.g. Leeds partnered with WWF to have access to their footprint 
calculator  data and used this in their public consult ation work by 
asking for a postcode in order to use the local data)  
o Follow this up with ideas to assist in the reduction of household 
carbon footprints  
o Carry out a specific School Transport Survey – work with schools to 
ask students how they travelled to school (Leeds carry out an 
annual survey  for this – this would help us focus future campaign 
work and monitor success of walking / cycling to school init iatives)  
 
 Climate Emergency and Sustainability Website   
Having a credible, vibrant, informative and interactive website will one of 
the most important aspects of improving community understanding and 
involvement.  This will be a very visible and important part of community 
engagement aimed at establishing the Council as a trusted source of 
information on the Climate Emergency and action to tackle it. This will 
either be in the shape of a new separate website or new pages integrated 
into the existing DBC web site. Webpages examples would include:  
 
o FAQs and Information on the Climate Emergency and 
Dacorum’s place in it  
­ Links to more information about climate emergency, informative 
videos. for example on the benefits of use of Solar Panels, 
accessing government  and energy company sustainability 
grants and ideas to reduce the household carbon footprint.  
o Dacorum’s Climate Emergency Strategy and Action Plan  – plus 
information on progress made.  
o Latest news  – press releases and  links to external trusted 
websites  
o New initiatives and promotional campaigns  
o ‘What you can do ?’ (info and links)  
­ Sections tailored for businesses, schools, residents and 
organisations  
(e.g. https://www.cornwall.gov.uk/environment -and-
planning/climate -emergency/what -can-i-do/)  
 Making homes more energy efficient  
 Link to a Carbon Footprint calculator –for residents / 
businesses  
 Making gardens more environmentally friendly  
 Encourage businesses  to also sign up to be net -zero 
carbon by 2030.  
 Signpost to support available for businesses  
o ‘How you can get involved’  
­ Directory, details and links for all sorts of local ‘green’ 
community projects  
 Volunteering opportunities  
­ Upcoming events and calendar  ­ Map with layers to provide info about local projects, events and 
activities that people can get involved in, e.g.:  
 Environmental Community Groups  
 Community orchards, gardens and allotments  
 Community fridges (if sufficient interest is demonstrated)  
 Refill s hops  
 Repair centres  
 Biodiversity strategy spots  
­ Providing access and an explanation of our Biodiversity 
strategy  and all other green initiatives such as:  
 How this relates to grass cutting – next year have signs 
up in the areas we are not cutting as regular ly to enable 
more wildflowers to grow and native insects, reptiles and 
small mammals to benefit and so that residents 
understand that they are part of a biodiversity plan and 
that their area has not been ‘forgotten’ (or we couldn’t be 
bothered to cut the g rass).  
 Actions to protect endangered species such as ‘Bug 
hotels’, and how to make gardens more friendly towards 
bees and hedgehogs for example  
­ How to book a Community Climate Emergency Talk  
­ Green Community Grants  and other available funding  
 E.g. https://www.cornwall.gov.uk/environment -and-
planning/grow -nature/funding/   
o In 2021/22 – create and launch a marketing campaign to 
communicate the Climate Emergency action plan  and direct 
residents to our new website. Have informative videos, information 
packs to send to each resident, presentations to deliver to 
community groups.  
 
7. Clean Safe and Gree n 
 
7.1 Tree Planting  
In order to increase the number of trees for biodiversity  purposes and to act as 
a carbon sink, 4200 trees are to be planted  by the Council  over the next 5 
years. Of these, 1170 are to be planted throughout this autumn and winter. 
This will include 45 large trees, 210 smaller sized trees and 915 whips for mass 
planting – subject to supplier availability.  
 
Due to COVID -19 restrictions the decision has been made not to plant whips as 
a community event this year.  
 The number of fruiting trees being planted across the borough is 
increasing, except in highway locatio ns. It is envisaged that the 210 
smaller sized trees being planted this year will in the majority be fruit or 
nut species.  
 The above planting numbers are in addition to our annual street tree 
planting programme, which averages about 70 specimens per year.  
 Additional tree planting on DBC land opposite the new cemetery at 
Bunkers Park has also been agreed and 26 trees will be planted there 
this autumn.  
 Trees for following years will be procured when stock becomes available.   During the coming 5 year period, s pecific areas of Bunkers Park will be 
allowed to re -wild (develop naturally using existing seed within the soil), 
so increasing tree cover on that site. An informal orchard is planned 
within the existing Bunkers Park site which could potentially be made 
formal with a volunteer group helping to manage this.  
 
Trees and Woodlands Officers are also working with Herts County Council and 
Herts Tree Officers to develop a list of tree species that are suited to this region 
and its changing climate, as well as tack ling new pests and diseases in a co -
ordinated, cost effective way.  
 
Work on the overall carbon dioxide reduction and carbon sequestration impact 
of trees in the Borough will require an external study. Trees and Woodlands are 
investigating an external provi sion of tree canopy cover survey that can provide 
data for carbon storage, sequestration, etc.  
 
A tree survey methodology, i -Tree is being investigated by the Trees and 
Woodlands Officers for suitability. Trees and Woodlands are liaising with local 
author ities across Herts about the provision of such surveys. Welwyn Hatfield 
have already had an i -Tree survey carried out, HCC are looking at running the 
same project.  
 
Trees and Woodlands are developing a tree survey project with DBC Housing 
team for gardens within tenanted control, to evaluate the amenity benefit of this 
tree stock to DBC and also understand its financial benefit and liability. 
Following the completion of this survey, data could be shared with i -Tree.  
 
7.2 CSG Summary of current projects and progress:  
 
1. Tree planting project 5 -year plan. This will start in the autumn 2020, and 
will involve the planting of 500 smaller woodland trees as well as 15 
bigger specimen trees. This will take place within Gadebridge Park 
between Galley Hill Road and Gade bridge Lane  (see above) .   
 
 Once this phase of the project is completed, we will be looking to plant 
1000 trees per year in Bunkers Park in the Long Saunders Field.  
 
2. In addition to the above, we will also be planting number of tree as one off 
schemes thi s year. This will be a mixture of woodland saplings and 
specimen trees. This is broken down as follows:  
- Keens Field 400 saplings and 20 specimen.  
- Lime walk 210 Saplings.  
- Bennetts End 30 specimen.  
 
3. Northend Orchard - We are also looking at the potential to a form 
friends/community group for the Northend Orchard Site.  
 
This Orchard site was developed by CSG working with Housing a few 
years back with the  idea that tenants in the area would look after it with 
CSG and Housing support. Unfortunately, there was no  up take from the 
local tenants at the time. As a result, CSG now has to pick up on the 
maintenance, at a cost to housing.   
Hopefully, with there being more emphasis on the environment now , 
there will be more interest this time round, and a group could be  formed 
as a pilot. This would be used as a blue print for further Orchards projects 
across the Borough. The first step is to visit the site with the Climate 
Emergency Officer  and assess its suitability.  
 
4. Allotments – CSG is working with the Estates Team i n support of a 
project to clear the allotment site at Windmill Road, which has become 
overgrown with only two sites being active. The Estates team is leading 
this project.  If this project is succe ssful, the scheme will be rolled out to 
other allotment site s across the Borough, which have low occupancy, and 
are overgrown.  
 
5. Grass cutting of verges – CSG leave a number of verges uncut through 
the summer months to promote natural wild meadow type growth and 
thereby increasing Biodiversity, as well as creating habitats for insect and 
small mammals.  These all have to be cut back and the end of the season 
and there is insufficient capacity at this moment to expand the 
programme.  CSG has therefore held off on creating any more such 
areas until such time as the cur rent areas can be mapped so as to 
determine how much is being left and what the costs are to cut and 
collect these areas.  To be able to increase the number of area, which are 
left uncut, CSG will require additional equipment and the resources to do 
this. O nce the mapping has been completed, we will have a better idea of 
what this additional resource will be and what the costs will be.  This can 
then be considered as part of the annual budget process.  
 
6. Wildflower Areas - In addition to the above, a number of Wildflower areas 
have been created within our Open Spaces in addition to those, which 
already exist. These are areas, which are have left to grow through the 
summer. In addition, they are also actively planted up with native 
perennials or over seeded.  
 
Once again, these types of areas have to have an annual cut and collect 
which as mentioned above is an issue from a resource capacity. We are 
holding off doing any more until we have clearer picture of what 
resources are required if more area are to be creat ed, and the costs.  
 
7. Another project  is a joint scheme with the Butterfly Association. A pilot of 
this scheme has been undertaken already at Keens Fields, which has 
been very successful with a number of Butterfly Species being found.  
Discussions are now ta king place with  the Butterfly Association and 
looking at rolling this out and creating more such habitats for Butterfly’s 
within the Borough . A number of ‘Bee friendly ’ areas  have been created , 
and work with the Bee Society  continues with b ee breeding prog ram for 
endangered Bees species.  
 
Waste Services Current  and future potential projects:  
 8. Flats Food Waste project. Waste Services is currently rolling out the 
additional  recycling service  to all flats  for the occupiers to recycle their 
food waste, which th ey could not do pre viously.  
 
Waste services has invested in a dedicated vehicle for this, and crew.  
So far, this has been very well received, with a very positive uptake from 
residents in the flats. To date 90% of all flats have been completed with 
the re mainder due to be completed this month.  
 
8. Energy Procurement  
 
8.1 The Council have signed up for the supply of ‘renewable energy’ via 
Renewable Energy Guarantees of Origin (REGO) backed electricity and 
Renewable Gas Guarantees of Origin (RGGO) backed gas. T hese schemes 
are available to the Council through the supply contracts that the Council have 
with Npower for the supply of electricity and with Total Gas & Power for the 
supply of gas. The REGO scheme is administered by Ofgem and the RGGO 
scheme is adminis tered by the Green Gas Certification Scheme. We initially 
looked at purchasing ‘renewable energy’ for all of the Council’s sites, but this 
would increase the expenditure for the Council by a six figure sum, so a 
decision was made to just purchase ‘renewabl e energy’ for the following four 
main sites:  
 The Forum  
 Berkhamsted Civic Centre  
 Victoria Hall  
 Cupid Green Depot  
 
8.3 The cost of the ‘renewable energy’ is based upon the usage per site and by 
using last year’s usage it is expected to cost an additional £2, 500 for electricity 
and £11,500 for gas. The schemes do not guarantee that you will be provided 
with 100% renewable energy, but they do issue out certificates for the 
generation of eligible ‘renewable energy’ (one REGO certificate per megawatt 
hour for ele ctricity and one RGGO certificate per kilowatt hour of gas) and 
evidence that this element of your supply has been generated from a 
renewable source.  
 
8.4 Electricity  
 Many organisations are keen to demonstrate sustainable credentials by 
purchasing ‘renewa ble energy’. But, if you do not generate yourself or have a 
direct contract for your supply with a renewable generator, a simpler way is to 
match the power you consume with the equivalent volume of renewable power 
supplied to the grid. From October 2020, N power will arrange this on behalf of 
the Council by securing REGO certificates (UK generated) for the equivalent 
electricity volume the Council consume.  
 
Npower will match the equivalent number of REGO certificates that are valid 
within a Fuel Mix Disclos ure period (Apr -Mar) to our consumption that also falls 
within that same period. The Council are likely to use 3,500 MW/H of electricity 
over the 4 sites. Most REGOs come from wind farms or solar parks, others 
from hydroelectric sources (that use water to produce electricity). The REGO 
scheme provides transparency to consumers about the proportion of electricity 
that suppliers source from renewable generation rather than the generation from fossil fuels. Further information is available at the following web site 
https://www.ofgem.gov.uk/environmental -programmes/rego/about -rego-
scheme   
 
8.5 Gas 
 
 From October 2020 Total Gas & Power will provide RGGO certificates from 
UK-based renewable generation ranging from anaerobic digestion to biomass 
plants. The Council are likely to use 1,350 MW/H of gas over the 4 sites.  
 
 What’s the difference between green gas and natural gas?  
 
 It’s the way they’re made. Natural gas comes from ma terial that decomposed 
naturally millions of years ago, while green gas comes from material that’s 
been produced and decomposed more recently. Green gas can renew itself 
quickly, over and over again, and unlike natural gas, it will never run out.  Since 
it doesn’t add more CO2 to the earths atmosphere it is a carbon neutral option.  
When a gas consumer buys an RGGO they are matching the gas that they 
have withdrawn from a Distribution Network to a unit of green gas that was 
produced and injected into the same  network. Further information is available 
at the following website https://www.greengas.org.uk/certificates   
 