Insert picture  
DRAFT for consultation | 15 JULY 2020  
Figure1  © Owen Vachell  
CLIMATE & ECOLOGICAL 
EMERGENCY STRATEGY  / i CONTENTS  
 
 
 
 
 
 FOREWORD  1  BUILDINGS  29 
GLOSSARY  3  FOOD & DRINK  33 
INTRODUCTION  4  ECONOMY  37 
OUR APPROACH  5  WASTE  41 
THE CLIMATE EMERGENCY  11  WATER  45 
THE ECOLOGICAL EMERGENCY  13  NATURAL ASSETS  49 
ACTION AGAINST CLIMATE CHANGE  16  TRANSPORT  53 
CARBON EMISSIONS & ACHIEIVNG 
NET ZERO  18  MAKING IT HAPPEN  57 
CARBON BUDGETS: PATHWAYS & 
TRAJECTORIES  21  YOUR IDEAS  61 
AREAS FOR ACTION  23  NEXT STEPS  65 
RENEWABLE ENERGY  25  REFERENCES  67 
     FOREWORD  
Back in May 2019, one of the first actions of the newly formed Dorset 
Council was to declare a Climate Emergency, acknowledging that the 
Council needs to act on the causes and impacts of climate change. In 
November 2019, this was updated to a Climate and Ecological Emer-
gency so that the protection and enhancement of Dorset ’s natural en-
vironment and wildlife biodiversity is also considered in our climate 
emergency mitigation work.  
To monitor and strategically guide this work, Dorset Council formed 
the Climate Change and Ecological Emergency Executive Advisory 
Panel. Made up of elected members from different political parties, the 
Panel is responsible for gathering information and working with offic-
ers to make recommendations to Dorset Council ’s Cabinet on actions 
that will help mitigate against climate change. They have also met with 
various organisations to hear their evidence and ideas on how Dorset 
Council can help reduce the environmental impact of its own services, 
as well as support Dorset communities to do the same.  
Since the Climate Emergency declaration was made, Dorset Council 
has recruited and employed full -time Corporate Sustainability Officers 
to lead and coordinate our response. They have also distributed 
somewhere in the region of £1.8m in Low Carbon Dorset Grants and 
secured around £10.5m from the Transforming Cities fund to create 
new active travel walking and cycling routes over the next 3 years. As 
well as securing a certified ‘green ’ renewable energy tariff for electrici-
ty supply from September 2020.  
As I’ve stated before, while other councils around the country may 
have chosen to set deadlines for carbon reduction and then work out  how they ’ll achieve them, I ’ve always wanted us to do the investigation 
and information -gathering first before setting out our strategy.  
This ensures that our action plan and timetable is both realistic and 
achievable, as well as ambitious.  
This strategy brings together a considerable amount of work, made 
more challenging due to a lack of comparable data as a result of Local 
Government Reorganisation and recommends areas for action that 
will deliver a realistic and achievable approach to ensuring Dorset 
Council is carbon -neutral by 2040, ahead of the UK government tar-
get. Carbon reduction targets towards this are presented in the strate-
gy as an approach to ongoing monitoring and annual evaluation of 
progress to ensure the pathway to carbon neutrality stays on track 
whilst also being adaptable to benefit from future funding opportunities 
and technologies  
This strategy was finalised during the COVID -19 lockdown era when 
we have seen just what can be achieved when society pulls together 
behind an emergency situation and what positive change can occur 
when unilateral effort is focused on a shared outcome. The positive 
impacts on climate and ecological change brought about by the lock-
down period,   global CO 2 emissions dropped by approx. 17% to levels 
not seen since 2006. In Dorset, the significant drop in road traffic 
brought about an estimated 27% reduction in carbon emissions. This 
shows us as a society what is possible in a short time when “business 
as usual ” is adjusted. We must not lose some of these gains and rush 
back to how things were before the pandemic.    
/ 01  FOREWORD  
The ambitions and actions set out in this strategy must be viewed 
alongside the financial pressures that are facing not just Dorset Coun-
cil but all Local Authorities, exacerbated at the current time by the ad-
ditional pressures brought about by Dorset Council ’s response to the 
COVID -19 pandemic. Whilst this strategy illustrates it will be possible 
to tackle the low hanging fruit and combine carbon -reducing actions 
with other priorities - placing climate change response at the front and 
centre of our wider priorities - there will still be a need for imaginative 
and innovative solutions working in partnership with central govern-
ment and the private sector.  
 
Councillor Ray Bryan  
Cabinet Portfolio Holder  
Highways, Travel and Environment  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
/ 02 GLOSSARY  
 Business as usual 
(BAU)  Future emissions trend if the current state of affairs 
continue as they are today.  
Carbon budget  The cumulative amount of carbon dioxide (CO 2) that 
can be emitted over a period of time to keep within a 
certain threshold  
Carbon dioxide  
equivalent (CO 2e) CO 2e, or carbon dioxide equivalent, is a standard 
unit used to measure  carbon footprints. It presents 
the impact of different  greenhouse gases  in terms of 
the amount of  CO 2 that would create the same 
amount of warming, thus allowing one figure to be 
used. CO 2 is used as this is the most prevalent 
greenhouse gas.  
Carbon neutral  Having no net release of carbon dioxide into the at-
mosphere.  
Climate change  The long -term change of climate typically measured 
over decades or longer. This is different to weather, 
which is short -timescale variations.  
Carbon Offsetting  Practices and technologies to neutralise remaining 
emissions that cannot be stopped entirely at source.  
Mitigation  Preventing climate change from getting worse by 
reducing our carbon dioxide emissions.  
EAP  Executive Advisory Panel  Greenhouse gas  
(GHG)  The Earth can maintain a regular average temperature 
(about 15°C), despite heat leaving the planet ’s surface. 
This is because a layer of gases in the atmosphere ab-
sorb and release heat – a process known as the green-
house effect. Greenhouse gases are those that have 
this effect, each with differing lifetimes and abilities to 
capture heat (infrared radiation).  
Resilience  The ability of a system and its component parts to an-
ticipate, absorb, accommodate, or recover from the 
effects of a hazardous event in a timely and efficient 
manner - through ensuring the preservation, restora-
tion, or improvement of its essential basic structures 
and functions.  
Carbon  
sequestration  A natural or artificial process by which carbon dioxide 
is removed from the atmosphere and held in solid or 
liquid form.  
Natural assets / 
capital  The stocks of environmental resources that are vital for 
the physical wellbeing of the population - such as clean 
air and water, biodiversity, natural flood protection, and 
healthy soils.  
LEP Local Enterprise Partnership  
AONB  Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty  
LNP  Local Nature Partnership  
CCC  Committee on Climate Change  
/ 03 INTRODUCTION  
Over recent years, scientific consensus has been building on the 
causes and scale of climate change. It now recognises that there is a 
rise in global temperatures caused by manmade sources of green-
house gases. Recent reports note that we must act swiftly to cut emis-
sions if we are to avoid the worst impacts of climate change, caused 
by global temperatures rising above 1.5 degrees. In addition, public 
concern about climate change and the future impact it may have on 
our communities, and furthermore the ecosystems upon which we re-
ly, is rising. There is an urgent need to take decisive action in the lim-
ited time we have left to make a difference.  The average Dorset residents ’ carbon footprint is 4.6 tonnes of CO 2e 
per year, some of the lowest in the region. However, this will need to 
reduce to near zero by 2050, if not sooner. Therefore, we all need to 
think about how we travel, use energy, and water, and how we create 
waste and what we eat to achieve a carbon -neutral future.  
The benefits of our actions will be great. We can stimulate Dorset ’s 
local economy through growth in green jobs and buying local goods 
and services. In addition, we can work towards significantly improving 
our health and wellbeing as a result of more active travel, better diets, 
cleaner air, a greater connection with the natural world, and healthier, 
more affordable homes. This is as well as being more connected and 
vibrant local communities.    
We are not starting from scratch. All the former Councils, which now 
form Dorset Council, had been working for many years to tackle cli-
mate change, improve the resilience of communities, and protect and 
enhance the biodiversity in Dorset in partnership with many organisa-
tions and communities. However, we recognise that we need a huge 
step-change in the scale.  
This strategy builds upon this work and sets out some of the key chal-
lenges and issues we face and some of the important areas where we 
need to act. There is much we still do not know and changes in gov-
ernment policy and technology over the coming years will greatly af-
fect what we all do. Therefore, this document needs to be dynamic 
and regularly reviewed. However, it is an initial road map that sets the 
direction and urgency of travel. With this strategy, we will consult resi-
dents, organisations, and partners, in order to further develop our 
plans and initiatives to achieve a carbon neutral Dorset.  
/ 04 “Right now, we are facing a man -made disaster of 
global scale. Our greatest threat in thousands of 
years … Climate Change ”  
Sir David Attenborough  
This is a national and global issue. However, Dorset will need to play 
our part. In response, Dorset Council declared a Climate and Ecologi-
cal Emergency and have committed to becoming a carbon -neutral 
Council by 2040, and work with organisations and residents to help 
Dorset become a carbon -neutral County by 2050.  
This is a mammoth task and the scale of the challenge should not be 
underestimated. It will require enormous investment to drive the fun-
damental changes required. Dorset Council recognises it has a key 
role to play in facilitating this change but, if we are to make this a reali-
ty, organisations and individuals will all have to play their part and 
work together to collaborate, share best practice, and take decisive 
action.  The Strategy  
This document sets out the framework for action to become a carbon -
neutral Council and the direction of travel needed for a County -wide 
approach. There will be many ways in which we can meet our goals 
and many technological and policy developments along the way. We 
will, therefore, need to remain flexible and review our strategy regular-
ly to ensure we take account of the latest developments.  
This document explores sev-
eral topics where we know 
action needs to be taken. 
These include Transport, 
Buildings, Waste, Water, 
Natural Assets, Economy, 
and Food and Drink. A sec-
tion on each of these topics 
sets out the key challenges 
and some suggested priority 
areas for action. From this 
strategy, we will be able to 
develop our own more de-
tailed action plan and engage with partners, organisations, and indi-
viduals to encourage wider action beyond Dorset Council. Each sec-
tion is supported by a separate more detailed background paper, 
providing some of the wider context and rationale.  
We will monitor and report progress annually against both our action  
 OUR APPROACH  
plan and carbon budgets and those of the wider County to ensure 
enough progress is being made or where greater focus is required to 
keep us on track. The strategy itself will be reviewed, either if it be-
comes clear that enough progress is not being made against the tar-
gets, or when the actions are largely complete and new ones need to 
be established.  
/ 05 
Figure 3  Figure 2  Take INDIRECT  action to facilitate 
change by ensuring the range of ser-
vices we provide across the County are 
delivered in a way that supports our 
journey towards a Carbon Neutral 
County.  Indirect (through services)  
/ 06 Take DIRECT  action to reduce our own 
carbon footprint in order to become a 
carbon -neutral Council by 2040, show-
ing leadership as a large public sector 
organisation.  Direct  Influence & Partnership  
As a large organisation, we directly ac-
count for at least 1% of Dorset ’s foot-
print from our use of energy and water 
in our buildings and assets, staff travel, 
and the waste we produce.  Dorset Council is responsible for the 
delivery of many key services, such as 
planning, housing, economic develop-
ment, waste and transport, etc.  Work in PARTNERSHIP  with other or-
ganisations and communities to drive 
change across the County and put in 
place larger programmes and projects 
to support fundamental change re-
quired.  
For example - Working with towns and 
parishes, community engagement, be-
haviour change, regional transport poli-
cy. This is as well as working with key 
partners and existing partnerships 
(LNP, LEP, AONB, Coast Forum etc.), 
therefore influencing key and sustaina-
ble energy strategies.  OUR APPROACH  
Dorset Council ’s role  
We are committed to achieving a carbon -neutral Council by 2040 and must help facilitate the changes required to work towards the  whole of Dorset 
becoming carbon -neutral by 2050.  
However, we recognise that Dorset Council has only limited powers and responsibilities in many of the areas where action is r equired. Therefore, 
Dorset organisations and individuals will all need to act collectively to achieve this wider ambition.  
The Council has three key roles in facilitating the change required and the strategy document is framed into these three key areas... 
Lobbying  
Critically, much of what is required will need to be led by national gov-
ernment through clear policy and support programmes (including fi-
nancial incentives). At present, the Climate Change Act sets a clear 
target for net zero by 2050. However, the Committee on Climate 
Change has highlighted that many areas of government policy do not 
yet align to achieve this, or set out a clear long -term approach, and in 
some cases act as barriers to action. Therefore, the policy will need to 
be aligned in several key areas to include housing standards, plan-
ning, building control, transport, waste, and energy.  which leads to greenhouse gas emissions, is having an impact on the 
natural world, effecting ecosystems around the globe. By addressing 
one of these emergencies, we also address the other and we would 
wish to strive for integrated solutions.  
We must also recognise that climate change is already happening 
and, even if we are successful in drastically curbing carbon emissions 
in Dorset, nationally and across the world, climate change will contin-
ue to impact on our lives. We therefore need to build resilience to cur-
rent and future climate change as an integral part of our overall ap-
proach. Throughout this strategy, we highlight many of these issues 
and key areas of action that are required to adapt to climate change.  
Our approach to achieving carbon neutrality must also be integrated 
within wider sustainability goals. Many of the actions required to tackle 
carbon emissions will have wider co -benefits, which will help to sup-
port and strengthen Dorset ’s local economy and address social is-
sues, such as fuel poverty. This is in addition to having wider benefits 
for health and mental wellbeing, such as improving air quality, encour-
aging active travel, and encouraging healthy diets.  
/ 07 The Council has a key role in lobbying government for 
clear policy and financial support required for the transi-
tion to a zero -carbon future and to actively participate in 
national forums and consultations on policy develop-
ment.  
An integrated approach  
Both the climate and ecological emergency are intrinsically interlinked, 
and both are crucial to our health and wellbeing. Changes in either will 
have knock -on effects on our physical health, sense of wellbeing, and 
safety. We rely on the natural systems for our very survival, such as  
food and energy, clean air, and water. However, our use of fossil fuels,  “Only by addressing both ecosystems and climate 
do we stand a chance of safeguarding a stable 
planet for humanity ’s future on Earth. ”  
 
Prof Johan Rockström  
Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research in Germany  OUR APPROACH  
OUR APPROACH  
Health & Wellbeing  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Climate change poses numerous risks to health and wellbeing. The 
World Health Organisation estimates an increase of 250,000 excess 
deaths per year between 2030 and 2050, due to the impacts of cli-
mate change. These impacts include heat -related mortality, increases 
in diseases, such as dengue fever and malaria, increased respiratory 
illness, and mortality due to extreme weather events. Indirect health 
impacts include illness relating to food and water safety, under -
nutrition related to food insecurity, skin cancer, and chronic kidney 
disease from dehydration.  
The lesser -known and often overlooked effects of climate change in-
clude the impacts on mental health. Mental health refers not just to 
mental illness, but also includes states of emotional resilience and 
feelings of wellbeing. There is increasing evidence that extreme 
weather events, which are more frequent, intense, and complex under  a changing climate, can trigger mental health disorders. These disor-
ders include post -traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), major depressive 
disorder (MDD), anxiety, depression, survivor guilt, substance abuse, 
and suicidal thoughts.  
Incremental climate changes, such as rising temperatures, rising sea 
levels, and increased drought can disrupt food and water resources, 
weaken infrastructure, and give rise to financial and relationship 
stress. This is as well as increased risks of violence, aggression, and 
the displacement of entire communities.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Paradoxically, these same disastrous implications may also inspire al-
truism, compassion, and optimism. In addition, it may also foster a 
sense of meaning and personal growth (otherwise referred to as post -
traumatic growth), as people band together to salvage, rebuild, and 
console amongst the chaos and loss of a changing climate.  
/ 08 Impact of Climate Change on Physical, Mental, and Community Health  
Medical & Physical Health  
- Changes in fitness & activity level  
- Heat-related illness  
- Allergies  
- Increased exposure to waterborne &  
      vector - borne illness  
Mental Health  
- Stress, anxiety, depression, grief, sense  
      of loss  
- Strains on social relationships  
- Substance abuse  
- Post-traumatic stress disorder  
Community Health  
- Increased interpersonal aggression  
- Increased violence & crime  
- Increased social instability  
- Decreased community cohesion  
Figure 5  
Figure 4  OUR APPROACH  
Health and wellbeing benefits are some of the largest potential gains from tackling the climate and ecological emergency.  
 
/ 09 Figure 6  OUR APPROACH  
Good quality natural landscapes, which have a high ecological value, 
have also been shown to reduce stress and sadness, lift poor mood, 
and make us feel better, with the relationship being strongest for anxi-
ety disorder and depression. People living in greener urban areas 
have significantly higher life satisfaction scores than those that live in 
less green areas. Exercising in green spaces is also associated with 
higher levels of mental health and wellbeing compared to indoor phys-
ical activity. Moreover, older people who engage in walking as a physi-
cal activity are less likely to develop dementia. Therefore, there is un-
doubtedly a positive relationship between improving biodiversity, qual-
ity of greenspace, and accessibility for health and wellbeing. 
/ 10 Figure 8  
Figure 7  
In terms of physical health, our use of our natural world, particularly 
greenspace, is associated with lower rates of disease, reduced risk of 
developing type 2 diabetes, and cardiovascular disease.  People who 
frequently visit high quality green space are more likely to be physical-
ly active and less likely to be overweight or obese. From the ancient 
Japanese practice of shinrin -yoku (forest walking) to the Yorkshire in-
dustrialist Titus Salt ’s factory placement, the health benefits of green 
spaces have been known across the world for time immemorial.   Climate change is a large -scale, long -term shift in the planet's weather 
patterns and average temperatures. It can happen naturally due to a 
variety of factors, such as changes in the Earth's orbit around the sun, 
the output of solar radiation, and geological activity. However, it is 
now acknowledged that human sources of emissions are partly re-
sponsible for the levels of greenhouse gases currently in the atmos-
phere. These concentrations are “extremely likely ” to have been the 
dominant cause of the observed warming since the mid -20th century.  
We are already experiencing a 1°C rise in average global tempera-
tures since pre -industrial levels. In 2015, countries around the world 
signed the Paris Agreement with the aim of rapidly cutting greenhouse 
gas emissions in order to keep global warming below 2°C, while pur-
suing efforts to keep it below 1.5°C.  
Every degree matters – Small changes in average global tempera-
ture will have a very large effect. The Intergovernmental Panel on Cli-
mate Change (IPCC) has since advised that, whilst a global warming 
of 1.5°C would lead to catastrophic impacts to health, livelihoods, food 
security, water supply, human security, and economic growth, these 
would be even worse at 2°C.  THE CLIMATE  
EMERGENCY  
Within the UK, the government advisory panel on climate change, the 
Committee on Climate Change (CCC), has highlighted that the 
world ’s current emissions trajectory is likely to lead to a 4°C rise of 
global temperatures and that deep and rapid action is required. A 4°C 
rise would see significantly worse impacts and scientists are con-
cerned that rising temperatures could lead to further releases of 
greenhouse gas emissions from natural sources. This, in addition to a 
reduction in polar ice caps may lead to ‘run away ’ climate change.  
Time is short – We (the world) are emitting 55 billion tonnes of car-
bon dioxide equivalent per year. Scientists estimate that if we emitted 
no more than 580 billion tonnes, this would give us just a 50% chance 
of keeping within 1.5°C (420 billion tonnes would give us a 66% 
chance). Therefore, we have only 8 -10 years at the current rate, with-
in which serious action is required to avert this crisis and avoid the 
worst impacts.  
/ 11 “If we don ’t take climate action, the collapse of 
our civilisations and the extinction of much of 
the world is on the horizon. ”  
Sir David Attenborough  
Figure 9  / 12 THE CLIMATE EMERGENCY  
The impacts of climate change  
Anthropogenic climate change is already happening. We are already 
seeing impacts, such as warmer temperatures with more heatwaves 
and less frost days, increased rainfall and flooding, and increased 
wind and storm intensities. This is as well as rising sea levels and tem-
peratures, changes in biodiversity, increased range of pests and dis-
eases, and changing seasons.  
The Met Office has modelled the possible future climate in the UK, 
based on different patterns of emissions, between a scenario where 
we achieve rapid emission reduction to a business -as-usual scenario 
where we see continued increase in emissions. The scale of climate 
change impacts will depend on how successful the world is at curbing 
greenhouse gas emissions, but overall, the models predict -   important, due to their magnitude now and in the future.  
AVERAGE TEMPERATURES WILL RISE by between 
1-7 degrees – with increased intensity and frequency of heat 
waves and hotter summers.  
RAIN FALL PATTERNS W ILL CHANGE with warmer 
wetter winters and hotter drier summers. When it rains in summer, 
there will be more intense storms.  
AVERAGE SEA LEVEL WI LL RISE by between 27 -
115cm in the Southwest by 2100 (with more later), significantly 
increasing risk to coastal communities and greater danger from 
storm surge or high tides.   FLOODING & COASTAL C HANGE RISKS TO COM-
MUNITIES, BUSINESSES , & INFRASTRUCTURE - 
affecting property values, business revenues, and, in extreme 
cases, the viability of communities.   
RISKS TO HEALTH, WEL LBEING, AND PRODUC-
TIVITY FROM HIGH TEMPERATURES – tripling prema-
ture heat -related deaths by the 2050s within an aging popula-
tion  
RISK OF SHORTAGES IN THE PUBLIC WATER 
SUPPLY, AND FOR AGRICULTURE, ENERGY GEN-
ERATION, AND INDUSTRY – putting increasing pressure 
and competition on industry, farming, and the public water sup-
ply, and the ecological status of rivers, lakes, estuaries, and 
groundwater.  
RISKS TO NATURAL CAP ITAL, INCLUDING TER-
RESTRIAL, COASTAL, MARINE, AND FRESHWA-
TER ECOSYSTEMS, SOILS AND BIODIVERSITY – 
Impacting the UK ’s native wildlife and availability of the vital 
goods and services provided by natural capital, including food, 
timber and fibre, clean water, carbon storage, and the cultural 
benefits derived from landscapes.  
RISKS TO DOMESTIC AN D INTERNATIONAL FOOD  
PRODUCTION AND TRADE  – supply chains, leading to 
volatile food prices, and increasing the need for effective stew-
ardship of natural resources here and overseas to maintain the 
resilience of the UK food system in the long -term. 
NEW AND EMERGING PES TS AND DISEASES, AND  
INVASIVE NON -NATIVE SPECIES, AFFECTING 
PEOPLE, PLANTS, AND ANIMALS - having widespread 
impacts on communities and economies, and are very expen-
sive to manage once established.  1 
The Committee on Climate Change identified the following six key are-
as of inter -related climate change risks for the UK as the most  2 
3 
4 
5 
6 Summary  
Humans are part of nature and rely on natural systems, processes, 
and materials for existence. Most of nature ’s contributions to people 
are not fully replaceable, and some are irreplaceable. Nature plays a 
critical role in providing food and feed, energy, medicines, and genetic 
resources, as well as a variety of materials fundamental for people ’s 
physical wellbeing and for maintaining our culture.  
The terminology of natural capital helps to describe our relationship 
with nature, our part within a natural world, and their inseparability. 
Natural assets are a way of describing the ‘hardware ’ of nature. From 
these assets flow various ecosystem services that are essential to life 
and wellbeing.   The ecological and climate emergencies are intertwined. Burning fos-
silised carbon is placing stress on the regulatory services provided by 
the ecosystem on the climate. Significant carbon dioxide released into 
the atmosphere is caused by land use change, which is also a key 
driver for ecological loss. Climate change is causing additional stress 
for many organisms which cannot adapt or migrate due to fragmented 
landscapes, which acts as a driver for further ecological loss.  
We are entering a period of mass extinction, with a significant loss of 
species and a reduction in species diversity. The extinction rate has 
been rising steadily over the last few centuries (see Fig 11), which re-
flects the expansion of human settlement and land use change since 
the Industrial Revolution. There has been a sharp acceleration in the 
degradation of nature since the 1970s.  This is in addition to a huge 
loss in abundance. In the 
UK, the total abundance 
of widespread butterfly 
species declined by 
58% on farmed land be-
tween 2000 and 2009, 
despite a doubling in 
conservation spending. 
Clouds of certain butter-
flies, widely reported in 
living memory, are now 
reduced to small num-
bers.  
/ 13 THE ECOLOGICAL  
EMERGENCY  
“Ever since we arrived on this planet as a spe-
cies, we ’ve cut them down, dug them up, burnt 
them, and poisoned them. Today we ’re doing 
so on a greater scale than ever .”  
Sir David Attenborough  
Species loss (from Ceballos et al 2015)  
Figure 10  Figure 11  / 14 THE ECOLOGICAL EMERGENCY  
Dorset is a relatively wildlife -rich county, albeit in one of the most na-
ture-depleted countries on earth.  Complacency is easy when sur-
rounded by apparent natural beauty, but this belies the scale of loss 
over the last 70 years. We have a responsibility to conserve that rela-
tive richness and enhance it, not only for the fabric of the natural envi-
ronment, but for the health of our future economy. Bournemouth Uni-
versity studies have shown that of four future scenarios, ranging from 
high investment in nature recovery to high agricultural intensification, 
the highest economic returns are found by investing in nature.  
Insert image  
Insert image  
Key causes  
Land use change is the prime driver. A huge loss of undisturbed eco-
systems or wildlands occurred in this country in the Neolithic and 
Bronze Ages, as agricultural land use spreads to feed growing popula-
tions. This process is still occurring across the world, most significant-
ly in tropical rainforests.  Another significant loss of semi -natural habi-
tats occurred in this country during the Second World War and the 
decades which followed. For example, Dorset lost 71% of its chalk 
grassland and rough grazing between 1946 and 2002, largely due to 
agricultural intensification. As habitats are lost, key ecosystem ser-
vices are compromised.  
Ecosystems are also damaged by pollution from industry, agriculture, 
transport, and households.  This ranges from the poorly understood 
effects of microplastics, which are now present at every place on 
Earth, to the toxicity of some agrochemicals.  
Climate change, itself caused by a sort of pollution (excess atmos-
pheric CO 2), is also a driver of species loss, as migration across a 
landscape is hindered by fragmented ecological networks.  Figure 12  
Figure 13  / 15 THE ECOLOGICAL EMERGENCY  
The impacts of ecological decline  
Biodiversity loss and ecosystem degradation causes impacts to the 
UK’s native wildlife and availability of the vital goods and services pro-
vided by natural capital, including food, timber, and fibre, as well as 
clean water, carbon storage, and the cultural benefits derived from 
landscapes.  Such losses exacerbate and amplify other observed 
risks, as regulatory and provisioning services become less effective. 
For instance:  
NOVEL PESTS & DISEASES  Four major UK crops are reliant on insect pollination (oil 
seed rape, field beans, apples, and strawberries). The first 
three are important in Dorset. On a national scale, wild polli-
nator contribution to these crops is valued at £690M/yr. 
This value and the food crops that it represents are at 
threat from rapidly falling insect populations  
Urban, arable, and even pastureland cover commonly al-
lows less rainfall to percolate into the soil, from where it 
would travel very slowly into streams, rivers, and the sea. 
This factor, combined with modified and canalised water-
courses, causes water from intense rainfall events to end 
up in low -lying areas at speed, exacerbating flooding  
Rising base temperatures and the global movement of peo-
ple, animals, and commodities are increasing the likelihood 
of novel pests and diseases appearing.  Depleted local nat-
ural systems are less resilient and can suffer disproportion-
ately. As an example, ash trees in diverse landscapes ap-
pear more resistant to ash dieback  FLOODING  REDUCTION IN POLLINATING INSECTS  
REDUCTION IN PEOPLE ’S EMOTIONAL 
CONNECTION TO NATURE  
Nature depletion is also making it harder for people to con-
nect with nature. Forming an emotional connection with na-
ture and retaining memories of the enjoyment of nature are 
important factors in maintaining mental health. It is also an 
important determinant in forming pro -environmental behav-
iour, essential for the wellbeing of future generations.  
Figure 14  ACTION AGAINST  
CLIMATE CHANGE  
International Action  
As climate change is a global issue, international action is needed. In 
1992, the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
was signed by 189 countries at the Earth Summit in Rio. However, it 
failed to set binding targets and has therefore had limited effect.  
As a result of the Kyoto Protocol, developed in 1997, 37 countries re-
duced global emissions by over 10% (the UK achieved a 12% reduc-
tion). However, this was not enough to offset the increasing emissions 
from other industrialising countries, which meant global emissions 
grew over the same period.   
In 2015, every country in the world signed the Paris Agreement, the 
first truly global effort to reduce carbon emissions, which aims to rap-
idly cut greenhouse gas emissions, particularly carbon dioxide, to 
keep global warming below 2oC.  
In 2018, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change published a 
report which suggested that we could limit global warming to 1.5°C, 
and that the previous target of 2°C would have catastrophic impacts 
to health, livelihoods, food security, water supply, human security, and 
economic growth. It warned that the world could potentially hit the 
1.5°C warming by 2030 if emissions carry on as they are (though this 
date could be as late as 2052) and that serious, large -scale action is 
urgently needed in the short term if we are to have any chance of 
avoiding a 1.5°C rise.  
 
 How is the UK tackling climate change?  
The UK was the first country to set legally binding carbon -reduction 
targets in the 2008 Climate Change Act, to cut greenhouse gas emis-
sions by at least 80% by 2050 (from 1990 levels) and agree interim 
five-year ‘carbon budgets ’ that take the country progressively towards 
that 80% target.  
/ 16 Insert image  
Figure 15  
In May 2019, the Committee on Climate Change produced a report 
called Net Zero, recommending a new target for the UK to be net zero 
greenhouse gases by 2050, which could be achieved with known 
technologies and behavioural changes within the same budget allowed 
for the previous target. In June 2019, the updated target was legislat-
ed by the UK Government.  ACTION AGAINST CLIMATE CHANGE  
Reaching net zero emissions requires an annual reduction of emis-
sions that is 50% higher than under the UK ’s previous 2050 target 
and 30% higher than achieved on average since 1990. This is an indi-
cation of how substantial the step up in action must be to cut emis-
sions in every sector.  
Such a step -change is only possible if clear, stable, and well -designed 
policies are introduced without delay. Currently, the policy framework 
is incomplete and contradictory. For example, the government says it 
wants people to cycle. However, councils can ’t afford to fill potholes. 
Meanwhile, trunk roads are getting a £30bn upgrade. Emissions from 
air travel are a significant contributor to GHG emissions. However, the 
government is expanding capacity at airports.   
Similarly, there is a need to increase renewable energy generation, 
but policy virtually bans all new onshore wind farms which supply the 
UK’s most cost -effective clean energy. Furthermore, incentives to in-
stall renewable technologies have been removed or greatly reduced 
and disincentives, such as increased Business Rates for companies 
installing solar PV, have been added.  
The Committee on Climate Change predict that the UK is on course to 
miss the next two carbon budgets due to a lack of clear policies 
(especially regarding heat), and regularly criticise the lack of action by 
the UK government.  
/ 17 Insert image  
 
 
Figure 16  CARBON EMISSIONS & 
ACHIEVING NET -ZERO  
UK Carbon Emissions  
In 2017, UK emissions were estimated to be 460.2 million tonnes of 
carbon dioxide equivalent (MtCO 2e) , a decrease of 2.7% compared 
to 2016. This decrease was mainly caused by:  
/ 18 A reduction in emissions from the energy sector of 
7.6%, due to a switch in fuel mix for electricity gen-
eration from coal and gas to renewables.  
A decrease of 4.2% in the residential sector, driven 
by a reduction in the use of natural gas for heating, 
due to warmer weather in the first half of 2017.  
When broken down by end user, transport accounts for 31% of all 
emissions, with Business accounting for 27% and Residential for 22%. 
Agriculture, Waste Management, Exports and Other make up the re-
mainder.  
County Wide Carbon Emissions  
Emissions in Dorset follow a similar pattern to those of the UK, drop-
ping from 2,500 ktCO 2e in 2005 to 1,725 ktCO 2e by 2017 (the most 
recent national data).  
By sector, the emissions profile is like the national picture but with a 
smaller proportion of emissions from industry. Notably, emissions from 
heating are down 26% and electricity down 56%, which reduces the 
overall contribution from the industry and domestic sectors. These 
emissions have particularly fallen due to a major rise in renewable en-
ergy capacity in the UK over recent years and reduced use of coal, 
both contributing to a decarbonisation of the national grid.  
In contrast, emissions from transport have only marginally decreased. 
Despite large gains in vehicle efficiency and clean technology, these 
gains have been offset by the increase in road traffic.  
Emissions from agriculture in Dorset have also remained steady but 
the carbon sequestration effect of land use changes has grown effec-
tively, balancing out these agricultural emissions. However, it is 
strongly suspected that this national data set is incomplete and that 
emissions from the agricultural sector are largely under -represented. 
Other areas in the South West have undertaken more detailed studies 
and discovered agriculture can account for over 10% of emissions of 
the area. Further work is required to estimate this for Dorset.  Figure 17  CARBON EMISSIONS & ACHIEVING NET ZERO  
Dorset Council Emissions  
As a new unitary Council (only in existence since April 2019), no his-
toric data is available to directly compare progress. However, each of 
the former local authorities now forming Dorset Council had carbon 
management programmes, which had recorded savings in the region 
of 10 -15% since 2009. Major carbon reductions had been made in 
the areas of streetlighting, staff business travel, and fleet vehicle full 
use.  
Scope of baseline data  
The baseline for measuring future progress will be financial year April 
2019 – March 2020.  
Dorset Council is one of the largest organisations in Dorset responsi-
ble for a wide range of services across the County and approximately 
1% of Dorset ’s carbon footprint. We own over 1,200 built assets, from 
office buildings, car parks and hotels. This is as well as running a fleet 
of over 400 vehicles, from cars to heavy goods vehicles, and manage 
40,000 streetlights and 4,000 signs. Many of our 9,000 staff would 
normally commute to and from work and use their cars for business, 
typically travelling over 5 million business miles a year. In addition, we 
work with partners and contractors to deliver key services, such as 
education and adult and social care.    
All these activities create greenhouse gas emissions from our use of 
energy to power and heat our buildings, as well as fuel used in fleet 
vehicles. This is in addition to our use of water, the disposal of our 
waste, the electricity to power streetlights and our staff's emissions 
outside of work.  
/ 19 Transport  
39%  (765 KtCO 2e) 
 
down 5%  
since 2005  Business  
22%  (433 KtCO 2e) 
 
down 40%  
since 2005  Residential  
29%  (568 KtCO 2e) 
 
down 35%  
since 2005  Agriculture  
4% (84kt)  
Land use  
-4% (105kt)  
Waste  
(unknown)  Proportion of net greenhouse gas emissions in each end user ( source BIES21)  
Each person in Dorset has an average carbon footprint of 4.6 tCO 2  . 
This is less than comparator councils and the UK average of 5.3 
tCO 2  / person.  Figure 18  
Figure 19  CARBON EMISSIONS & ACHIEVING NET ZERO  
/ 20 
We have included in our carbon footprint all the carbon emissions that 
we have influence over. This includes:  
DIRECT CONTROL - emissions from our own op-
erational buildings, business travel, fleet vehicles, 
and Dorset streetlights and road signs.  
 
INDIRECT INFLUENCE - emissions from the deliv-
ery of services, such as Adult Care buildings oper-
ated by Tricuro, Local Authority Schools, Leisure 
centres, and contracted out services, such as 
school transport and staff commuting.  
 Dorset Council baseline emissions profile, initial breakdown 2019 -2020  
Figure 20  As a new authority we don ’t yet have enough data to give an accu-
rate figure. But we can say that the footprint for 2019/20 was at least 
33,704 tCO 2e/yr. More data is needed on the Council ’s fleet fuel con-
sumption and commuting figures to give a more complete represen-
tation.  
In 2016 the County Council ’s footprint was recorded as 45,727 
tCO 2e/yr.  But a direct comparison between this figure and today ’s 
footprint will not be very useful as what we are counting has changed 
- emissions from academies are no longer included, but school 
transport and highway maintenance are.   
In all likelihood, our footprint will have dropped from the 2016 figure. 
Mainly because of the exclusion of academies and the reduction in 
the carbon intensity of the electricity grid. These factors are likely to 
have outweighed the additional emissions from an increase in Council 
staff and buildings during this period. We will have a clearer picture 
once more data has been gathered and sufficiently analysed.  Dorset Council ’s TOTAL Carbon footprint for 2019 -2020 is 
estimated at 40,000 to 45,000 tCO 2e.  CARBON BUDGETS  
PATHWAYS & TRAJECTORIES  
Global & National Carbon Budget  
The International 
Panel of Climate 
Change (IPCC) has 
noted that we would 
have only a 66% 
chance of keeping 
global warming under 
1.5°C, if the world 
kept to a global car-
bon budget of about 420 giga (i.e. billion) tonnes of greenhouse gases 
(tCO 2e).  
The world is currently emitting at around 55 billion tCO 2e per year, 
which means that this budget of 420 billion tonnes would be used up 
in under eight years if nothing changes.  
In 2008, the UK was the first country in the world to adopt legally bind-
ing emissions reduction targets of 80% by 2050 (compared to 1990 
levels) and led to a series of five carbon budgets to 2032.  
The target was upgraded to be net zero emissions by 2050, with a 
100% reduction instead of 80%. In September 2020, the Committee 
on Climate Change will be advising on the 6th Carbon Budget (2033 -
37), which will be the first Carbon Budget set in line with this new net 
zero target. However, the Committee on Climate Change have 
warned that the UK is not on track to meet the fourth (2023 -27) or fifth 
(2028 -32) carbon budgets.   Global & National Carbon Budget  
Based on the global carbon budget and scaling this by the population 
of Dorset gives us a budget of 21,000,000 tCO 2e. In 2017, Dorset 
emitted a total of 1,745,000 tCO 2e. Therefore, if Dorset continued to 
emit at the 2017 rate, we will have used our carbon budget up by 
2030.   
There are various pathways that could be followed.  
Emissions have been reducing in recent years and are likely to have 
reduced in 2018, 2019, and 2020.  
Given our historic per-
formance, it does not 
appear overly chal-
lenging to follow the 
orange 1.5°C per -
capita budget line 
(figure 21) to achieve 
a Carbon Neutral Dor-
set by 2050.  
However, the chal-
lenge is more obvious 
when the current best -guess projection for the UK's emissions is 
scaled to Dorset and added (yellow line). This accounts for the UK 
having already picked low hanging fruit, such as reducing coal burn-
ing, investing in cheap efficiency measures, and adding renewable 
energy generation. Importantly, if Dorset continues to follow the UK's 
projected path, our emissions will have to follow the green trajectory in  
/ 21 
Figure 21  CARBON BUDGETS  
PATHWAYS & TRAJECTORIES  
Climate Change Act and remaining within its per -capita budget for a 
1.5°C temperature rise suggests a minimum path Dorset Council 
could follow (shown by the blue line). We have chosen to set an earlier 
target by achieving a carbon neutral Council by 2040, this is shown by 
the black line. This will be our target trajectory against which we will 
monitor progress.    
/ 22 order to stay within our per -capita portion of the 1.5°C budget.  
A considerable effort is going to be needed to stay on the orange 1.5°
C per -capital budget pathway. This is going to require enormous 
changes to heat and transport, as well as accelerated changes to 
electricity generation. The county wide interim carbon budgets for this 
trajectory would need to be:  
BY 2025 – (1,396,000 tCO 2e) - 20% reduction  
BY 2030 – (872, 500 tCO 2e) - 50% reduction  
BY 2040 – (349,000 tCO 2e) - 80% reduction  
BY 2050 – (Zero tCO 2e) - 100% reduction  
Dorset Council ’s Carbon  Budget  
Dorset Council only has control over the carbon emissions 
produced from its operations and this will be a key focus of 
our initial programme.  
To achieve this Dorset Council will need to meet interim Carbon budg-
ets of:  We have no historic data for Dorset Council. However, by using the 
historic emissions of the Councils which combined to form Dorset 
Council, our best guess is in the region of 40,000 to 45,000 tonnes 
per year in the early part of the decade. Applying the UK predictions 
of future emissions (discussed above) to these figures, we can esti-
mate the future ‘Business as Usual ’ trajectory (yellow in figure 22), is 
the line we are most likely to follow if action remains at current lev-
els. If we follow this trajectory the green line shows we will have used 
up our carbon budget by about 2030!  
Scaling the emission pathway from the UK's 2050 target from the  
 2025  40% reduction  
2030  71% reduction  
2035  90% reduction  
2040  100% Carbon neutral  
It should be noted that each of these Dorset Council emission path-
ways starts with estimated data. Once the full 2019/20 baseline has 
been determined more accurately, Dorset Council will be able to pub-
lish annual budget figures for each pathway, against which progress 
can be monitored.  
Figure 22  AREAS FOR ACTION  
The member -led EAP required thorough investigation and information -
gathering to ensure that the strategy produced by Dorset Council was 
factual and realistic. The primary actions were:  
 
Collate and analyse information from preceding Councils to es-
tablish baseline data on Dorset Council and the wider Dorset 
Area regarding carbon emissions to establish an accurate as 
possible carbon footprint and identify areas for action  
 
Establishing an accurate baseline figure of current emissions of GHG 
and mitigation measures has been uniquely challenging for Dorset 
Council as a result of 2019 Local Government Re -Organisation. The 6 
proceeding Councils recorded and retained information relating to 
carbon emissions and sustainability management in a variety of differ-
ent ways to varying degrees of accuracy leading to considerable diffi-
culties in forming an accurate current picture.  
 
Engage with partners, individual teams and the community to 
explore key issues, opportunities, identify progress and collate 
examples of national best practice.  
 
• A Dorset Council staff workshop was held in October 2019 to 
facilitate discussion of key issues, identify what was already un-
derway and gather suggestions and ideas for further action    
 • Two Inquiry Days were held in February & March (2020) to ena-
ble organisations, community groups, individuals, school chil-
dren and Dorset Youth Parliament to present their ideas to the 
Dorset Council Executive advisory Panel.  
• Engagement with consultants, developers and energy suppliers 
to explore opportunities for renewable energy in Dorset  
• Input into major projects with aim of securing low -carbon design 
and develop policy (e.g Weymouth peninsula & building better 
lives programme)  
• Engaged with Town and Parish Councils through a workshop in 
November 2019  and provided some guidance and ongoing sup-
port through Low Carbon Dorset programme  
• Sought views from young people through direct representation 
to the Executive Advisory Panel in December 2019.  
• Sought views from Dorset residents, via an online ‘Call for 
Ideas ’ (December 19 to February 20) leading to nearly 800 re-
sponses  
 
A summary of the ideas generated through engagement with local 
schools and communities through the ‘call for ideas ’ process is de-
tailed in the Your Ideas  section at the end of this strategy.  
 
/ 23 AREAS FOR ACTION  
As a result of this evidence gathering eight key themes were identified 
and internal Task and Finish groups established to bring together tech-
nical experts and wider stakeholders.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The theme -based Task and Finish groups were able to explore in more 
detail the national approach, scientific guidance, the relevance to Dorset 
Council and the Dorset area, and guide the creation of background tech-
nical papers to set out the information gathered and identify and contex-
tualise areas for action.  
Each technical paper briefly sets out not only the context but also the key 
issues and opportunities for action in each of the eight areas. Identifying 
objectives and areas where Dorset Council will seek to take action or 
work with wider partners.  
Summary versions of these papers are detailed in the following sections, 
each with a link to the background technical paper. In addition to setting 
the background, they identify a number of actions which Dorset Council 
intends to progress and will form the basis for development of more de-
tailed actions plans (see Next Steps  section later in the document)...  
/ 24 Insert image  
Figure 23  
Figure 24  RENEWABLE ENERGY  
Scale of the challenge...  
To address the climate emergency all energy currently provided by 
fossil fuels for heating, transport and electricity will need to come from 
a low -carbon source. This will need to be through electricity or hydro-
gen generated from renewable energy (solar, wind, hydro, biomass) 
or nuclear.   
This will mean switching all heating to low -carbon alternatives such as 
biomass, heat pumps or hydrogen, and switching all transport to elec-
tric batteries or hydrogen. It will then require an enormous increase in 
renewable electricity generation and low -carbon hydrogen generation 
to meet the demand.  
It will also be essential that we can store energy locally and manage 
our energy in a smarter way in order to meet peak energy demand 
and make the most of the renewable energy we produce.  
Given the uncertainty about heating and hydrogen in national policy; it 
is difficult to estimate how much renewable energy will be needed to 
meet the challenge in Dorset. Under the greenest scenario energy de-
mand in the Dorset Council area will be around 4 billion kWh/yr .  So, 
for Dorset to play its fair share and generate 100% of its own energy 
demand we will need around 4GW of solar (around 19,000 acres) or 
2GW of wind (around 700 big turbines), or a combination of the two. 
Bournemouth, Christchurch and Poole Council will need as much 
again, if not more, and is unlikely to be able to fit it within its own 
boundaries.  
For Dorset Council alone it is estimated that we will need 60MW of  Dorset ’s progress so far … 
• Significant increase in installed renewable energy capacity in 
Dorset between 2010 to 2016 to 480 MW  (around 10% of all 
Dorset Council area ’s energy demand)  
• 1MW of renewable energy capacity installed on Dorset Coun-
cil’s estate and schools  
• The Dorset -Council -run ERDF -funded Low Carbon Dorset pro-
gramme is currently encouraging (through advice and grants) 
the installation of 4 MW of renew  able energy capacity across 
the Dorset Council and BCP areas  
• Bridport is currently hosting a volunteer -run pilot project, the 
first in England, to allow local trading of renewable energy  
Hear more about the challenge 
we are facing in Dorset from 
Low Carbon Dorset ’s  
Renewable Energy  
Technical Officer...  
/ 25 solar PV (or 30MW of wind) to cover our own energy demand once 
efficiency measures have been taken.  To ensure this demand is kept 
to a minimum improving the efficiency of our buildings will be critical.   RENEWABLE ENERGY  
Key Issues...  
Uncertainty at national level around key strategic decision 
& direction  
Nationally  In Dorset  
Electricity grid limited in its ability to support deployment of 
renewable energy at scale needed  
Technology is still developing in some areas  (like EV in-
frastructure) to enable mass deployment  
Current policy framework does not support the journey to 
a low carbon future  
Delivery at scale is required, every opportunity to utilise 
renewable energy to meet current demand needs to be taken 
& large -scale deployment projects need to be developed  
Dorset Council ’s renewable energy capacity needs to 
increase by a factor of 60 to meet demands  
Dorset county ’s renewable energy capacity needs to 
increase by a factor of at least 8 to meet its own demands  Existing planning system does not actively encourage re-
newable energy installations  
Deployment of onshore renewable energy stagnated 
since 2016 due to planning restrictions imposed & removal of 
all subsidies   
Lack of financial incentives in place to encourage invest-
ment in renewable energy  Decision makers within many organisations are not al-
ways aware of renewable energy opportunities  
Cases where small -scale renewable energy can offer 
good returns  need to be identified & promoted to local busi-
nesses  Financial benefits to transitioning Dorset Council ’s entire 
estate and operations to zero carbon  
Key Opportunities...  
Increased energy security  possible through local low -carbon 
generation  
Income stream  from generating our own renewable energy  
Potential to attract investment into Dorset ’s sustainable in-
frastructure  
Potential reduction in energy costs for local businesses & 
communities  
Dorset Council ’s county farms could be exemplar test 
sites for renewable energy generation  
Biomass identified as a significant opportunity for Dorset 
in Bournemouth Dorset & Poole Renewable Energy Strategy 
2012  
Opportunity for DC to show leadership and set an example  
Largely untapped resource of solar, onshore wind, offshore 
wind and tidal in Dorset  
/ 26 Figure 25  RENEWABLE ENERGY  
Areas for Action...  
Dorset Council cannot itself deploy the GigaWatts of renewable energy required at a Dorset -area level, and does not have control  of national plan-
ning policy or the economics of renewable energy.  But there are many things that the Council can do to facilitate the transi tion from the current state 
to a situation where Dorset supplies its own energy demands with renewable energy.   
Direct  Indirect (through services)  Influence & Partnership  
Maximise renewable energy oppor-
tunities of all DC buildings; convert 
all off -grid buildings to heat pumps 
or biomass, convert heating of all on
-grid buildings to hydrogen -ready 
hybrid heat pumps, install max ca-
pacity solar arrays on every building  
Construct large renewable energy 
installation (around 60 MW of solar 
PV or 30 MW of wind turbines) on 
Council owned land to meet Coun-
cil’s demand  As Local Planning Authority – ac-
tively encourage renewable energy 
deployment  
Work with renewable energy devel-
opers in Dorset to secure new re-
newable energy generation to meet 
(and exceed) needs of the Council  Commission study to identify oppor-
tunities for renewable energy in 
County Farms and Council carparks  Undertake detailed resource map-
ping to confirm Dorset has the tech-
nical resources to be self -sufficient. 
Potential sites can then be identified 
in the Local Plan  
Establish a positive planning policy 
framework and toolkit for maximis-
ing the use of renewable energy 
within new developments  Lobby central government over the 
major hurdles to renewable energy 
deployment, the Navitus Bay deci-
sion, investment needed on grid infra-
structure, and future of heat  
Work in partnership with BCP to plan 
a zero -carbon energy system for Dor-
set 
Dedicated resources to promote re-
newable heat in cases where it is fi-
nancially viable  
Extend Low Carbon Dorset pro-
gramme  
Dedicated resources to assisting with 
the expansion and awareness build-
ing of the Energy Local project in Dor-
set 
A review of whether Council run fuel -
poverty schemes could install low -
carbon heating systems over gas 
boilers  
/ 27 Read full discussion paper on Renewable Energy   
View detailed action plan  RENEWABLE ENERGY  
/ 28 Stewarts  is a family run business in Dorset with three garden 
centres, a nursery and a landscaping division.  
With support from Dor-
set Council ’s Low Car-
bon Dorset programme, 
in 2019 -20 Stewarts 
spent over £800k on low
-carbon initiatives to 
drastically reduce their 
carbon footprint. Part of 
this project to become 
more environmentally 
and financially sustainable included installing 179kWp of solar 
PV on the rooftops of their two Dorset garden centres.  And 
investing in a ground -source heat pump in their new 8,000 sq 
m glasshouse.  
These installations, combined with energy efficiency 
measures, reduced their footprint by 449 tonnes of CO 2  
(40%) and will save around £50k in electricity costs each year. 
These savings will be re -invested in to the business and will 
help support clean growth.  Case Study: Dorset  
Community Energy  
Dorset Community Energy 
(DCE) is a not -for-profit Commu-
nity Benefit Society which facili-
tates community ownership of 
renewable energy production.  
It was established in 2013 with support from the BIG Lottery.  
Its 152 members have invested £490,000 in the last 7 years, 
this has paid for the installation of solar PV panels on 12 
schools and four community buildings in Dorset - resulting in 
420kW of installed capacity.  
Electricity is provided to the community buildings at little or no 
cost, and any electricity not used on site is exported to the na-
tional electricity grid. Revenue is generated from the sale of 
electricity and from the government ’s feed -in-tariff. The in-
come covers the operational cost of the Society and provides 
a return on investment to member shareholders.   
In 2019 DCE launched its third share offer and as of May 
2020, 245kW has been installed at three sites at a total ca-
pacity of 665kW.   
Read more about DCE here.  
Case Study: Stewarts Garden Centre  / 29 BUILDINGS & ASSETS  
Scale of the challenge...  
Carbon emissions from Dorset ’s buildings currently account for about 
60% of the county ’s footprint; with around 1 million tonnes of CO 2e 
emitted every year to heat and power Dorset ’s residential, commercial 
and public -sector properties.  
To reach national carbon -reduction targets these emissions will need 
to be eliminated and all energy used to maintain a comfortable indoor 
environment will need to be generated from renewable sources.   
This will require a significant switch away from existing gas and oil 
central heating systems (which currently make up 82% of all Dorset ’s 
domestic heating systems) to heat pumps, biomass or hydrogen 
(when available). As well as substantial improvements to the energy 
efficiency of buildings to reduce overall energy demand.  
To achieve this in Dorset a huge retrofit programme will be needed to 
address all of the county ’s building stock, on top of a sizeable increase 
in renewable energy generation to meet the residual demand.  
The high proportion of properties in Dorset connected to mains gas 
will pose a particular challenge, and decisions on whether to wait for 
developing hydrogen technologies or risk not meeting peak electricity 
demand through over adoption of heat -pumps will be very hard.  
In addition, it is predicted that a further 18,000 houses will be built in 
Dorset in the next decade.  These will need to be zero -carbon in de-
sign and build if they are to avoid adding to the county ’s emissions fur-
ther.  
Dorset Council ’s own buildings and assets currently account for 
around 70% of its footprint.  In order to reach net zero the council will 
need to focus on improving energy efficiency, transitioning away from  
 Dorset ’s progress so far … 
• 40% reduction in Dorset ’s building emissions since 2005 (in line 
with national figures, and mostly due to grid decarbonisation)  
• 150 homes a year benefitting from improved heating systems and 
reduced fuel poverty through Dorset Council ’s Healthy Homes 
Scheme  
• Over 100 organisations have benefited from £2.5m of grant fund-
ing and free technical support for energy efficiency and renewa-
ble energy projects through Dorset Council ’s Low Carbon Dorset 
programme  
• 47% reduction in electricity used for streetlighting since 2008 as 
a result of energy efficiency measures  
Hear more about Dorset Coun-
cil’s buildings and assets and the 
role they have to play in tackling 
the climate emergency from our 
Technical Services Manager 
for Assets & Property...  
fossil fuels and sourcing energy from renewable sources.   
An asset review of the new unitary authority is currently underway and 
an Asset Management Plan is in development.   
Significant new building projects led by Dorset Council, including the 
Weymouth Peninsula and Building Better Lives programme, will provide 
an opportunity to create true net zero carbon homes and commercial 
properties.  If this opportunity is not taken now, or in the near future, 
these developments will increase Dorset ’s footprint further.   
BUILDINGS & ASSETS  
Key Issues...  
Nationally  In Dorset  
Lack of national strategy for heat resulting in uncertainty 
for investment decisions  
Current standards & potential future homes standards 
for new developments are not high enough to deliver on 
national carbon -reduction targets  
Retrofitting current housing stock is a very significant 
challenge and will require action from different organisa-
tions, government and individuals  
Dorset Council is currently undertaking an asset review 
and therefore it is unclear which buildings will be retained  
Rural nature of Dorset results in a relatively high proportion 
of older, detached, hard -to-treat and off -gas-grid buildings  Lack of legal requirement to retrofit buildings , combined 
with the relative cost of retrofit measures and average energy 
costs  
/ 30 
Higher build specifications to address the climate 
emergency may increase build costs and conflict with the 
need for more affordable housing  Lack of renewable energy capacity in Dorset means the 
demand of buildings cannot be met from local renewable en-
ergy sources  Key Opportunities...  
Upgrading the quality of Dorset ’s housing stock  to make 
homes healthier, more comfortable and safer from impacts of 
climate change  
Reducing energy bills for residents  and helping tackle fuel 
poverty in Dorset  
Improving quality of commercial premises - creating better 
working environments, reduced energy bills, and increased 
productivity and competitiveness for businesses   
Chance to design out energy use and design in climate 
resilience in Dorset ’s new builds  
Opportunity for Dorset Council to lead by example by de-
carbonising own estate  
Scope to expand Dorset Council ’s proven energy effi-
ciency and behaviour change programmes to provide addi-
tional support and funding to residents (Dorset Healthy Homes) 
and organisations (Low Carbon Dorset)  
Fitting gas boilers is currently the most cost -effective 
way of addressing fuel poverty but maintains reliance on 
fossil fuels  
Commercial and industrial emissions are less depend-
ant on gas  - with a higher proportion of this sector ’s emis-
sions coming from electricity and other fuels  Lack of historic emissions data for Dorset Council as the 
new authority only formed in 2019  
Air source heat pumps part funded by Low Carbon Dorset at  
Riversmeet leisure centre , Gillingham  
Figure 26  BUILDINGS & ASSETS  
Areas for Action...  
Dorset Council is extremely limited in the powers it has to achieve the aforementioned objectives. However, we do have contro l of our own current 
buildings and any future buildings that are constructed on our land. We are also able to influence and stimulate action with partners to facilitate 
change.  
Direct  Indirect (through services)  Influence & Partnership  
Lead by example by ensuring Dor-
set Council ’s estate becomes zero 
carbon by 2040  
Ensure climate change is a central 
consideration throughout the asset 
review, and in the development of 
Dorset Council ’s Asset Manage-
ment plan  Encourage designs and layouts 
which lend themselves to low -
carbon energy solutions, and pro-
vide guidance and advice for devel-
opers to achieve zero carbon 
standards  
Establish policies to ensure that any 
of the Council ’s new build projects 
are designed to be zero carbon 
from the outset.   Develop and promote case studies 
and examples of best practice on 
our own estate to encourage repli-
cation by others  Ensure the Dorset Housing Strategy 
incorporates the reduction of car-
bon emissions and increased risk to 
climate impacts  
Develop local plan policies to en-
sure climate risks are identified and 
avoided in new developments, such 
as flood risks and overheating  Lobby government for clarity on na-
tional strategy for heat and national 
policy framework  
Work in partnership to deliver pro-
grammes to improve energy efficien-
cy of housing stock (e.g further ex-
pand Healthy Homes Scheme)  
Decarbonise heating by investigating 
largescale installation of low carbon 
heating and undertaking heat map-
ping to identify opportunities  
Educate residential and non -
residential sectors on low carbon 
technologies, energy efficiency, and 
sources of funding to encourage be-
haviour change & greater uptake of 
low-carbon technology  
Secure funding to expand and ex-
tend the Low Carbon Dorset Pro-
gramme. If this is successful, seek 
funding to extend it further, both in 
time and scope  
Work with partners to increase cli-
mate change resilience of communi-
ties & buildings by understanding the 
future climate risks within Dorset  
/ 31 Continue upgrade of all Dorset 
streetlights to LEDs  
View detailed action plan  Read full discussion paper on Buildings & Assets   BUILDINGS & ASSETS  
/ 32 Dorset History Centre is the archives service and local 
studies library for Bournemouth, Christchurch, Dorset and 
Poole.   
In 2019 the History Centre was awarded a grant of £75k from 
Dorset Council ’s Low Carbon Dorset programme to help 
them become one of the first institutions of their kind to move 
to a largely passive air -handling system for its historic ar-
chives.    
This project will facilitate near passive control by improving 
the air tightness of the structure of the building and by replac-
ing existing air handling and 
heating systems with much 
simpler smaller scale sys-
tems better suited to minimal 
heating and humidity con-
trol.   
It is expected that this pro-
ject will save the centre 
around 90 tonnes of CO 2 
and £20k in energy costs 
each year, reducing their 
overall energy consumption by 55%.   
Riversmeet  is a community run leisure centre in Gillingham.  
And like most leisure centres re-
quires a lot of energy to run. As a 
not-for-profit social enterprise the 
centre were keen to reduce their 
energy demand, and the associat-
ed costs, as much as possible.  
Leaving a much more environ-
mentally friendly, sustainable 
community asset to be enjoyed by 
generations to come.   
With help from Low Carbon Dorset, they completely rede-
signed their pool heating and ventilation to be much more en-
ergy efficient using a novel heat pump system. And installed 
LED lights and water and energy saving aerated shower 
heads.   Combined these measures will save around 195 
tonnes of CO 2 a year and reduce their electricity costs by 
over 50%, saving around £48k a year.  
This is only the second site in Dorset where this novel ap-
proach to energy management is being trialled, and hopefully 
these centres will demonstrate the savings that can be made 
both in carbon and in costs.  
Case Study: Dorset History Centre  Case Study: Riversmeet  / 33 FOOD & DRINK  
Scale of the challenge...  
The production of food is the fourth highest greenhouse gas emitting 
sector in the World.  In the UK agriculture alone accounts for 10% of all 
carbon emissions.  When you then take into account emissions from 
food processing, transport and food waste as well it is estimated that 
the total carbon footprint of food and drink consumed in Britain is 130 
million tonnes CO 2e a year.  
To reduce the environmental impacts of food production, but still meet 
the rising demands, more food will need to be produced using less land 
and emitting fewer greenhouse gases. This will mean farming practices, 
both nationally and within Dorset, will need to change.  
For Dorset, where approximately 75% of the land is used for agricul-
ture, we will need a county -wide shift to less carbon -intensive, more 
sustainable food production methods.  Where possible the wider adop-
tion of regenerative farming practices will be needed.   
This will include making changes to the Council ’s own county farm es-
tate which comprises 46 farms spread over 2,600 hectares.  
The sector will also need to work on adapting to the changing climate.  
A warmer and wetter environment in Dorset will mean a change in 
planting and harvesting dates, crop varieties and suitable livestock 
breeds. This may consequently affect food choice through price and 
availability.  
As well as changes to food production and farming practices a signifi-
cant shift in consumer behaviour is required.  There will need to be less 
demand for carbon -intensive foods like meat and dairy, and an increase  Dorset ’s progress so far … 
Hear more about the chal-
lenges and opportunities in 
Dorset from the manager 
of the Dorset AONB 
team ... 
Dorset Farmers ’ Market was established in 2004, and short-
ens the chain between food producer and purchaser, reduc-
ing food miles travelled  
Creation of Dorset Food & Drink  a not -for-profit, community 
interest company who support and promote local food & drink 
businesses  
Collaborative campaigns with Dorset Food & Drink and Litter 
Free Coast & Sea are helping to tackle the issue of packaging 
waste  
All of Dorset ’s household food waste is now treated within the 
county using anaerobic digestion (see Waste ) in the sourcing of food and drink locally.  A drastic reduction in food 
waste, which is currently equivalent to around a fifth of all food pur-
chased, will also be needed.  
/ 34 FOOD & DRINK  
Key Issues...  
Nationally  In Dorset  
Food with high energy density & increased carbon 
emissions is often cheaper than its less energy dense 
counterparts - usually evident in more processed foods with 
high sugar and fat contents  
Key Opportunities...  
County Farm Estate can play an important demonstrative 
role for low -carbon, ecologically friendly farming techniques  
Dorset County Farm Estate is currently focussed on 
carbon -intensive practices providing little additional eco-
logical or carbon sequestration gain  
Locally produced, organic foods carry a price premium 
which limits its accessibility to low -income families  
Food poverty in Dorset – recent studies showed that Wey-
mouth ’s foodbank is the busiest in the county  
The percentage and volume of food and drink sold at 
local producers ’ markets and farm shops is very low in 
comparison to the amount of food and drink consumed  High volumes of food waste generated in UK  equivalent 
to between a fifth and a quarter of that purchased by con-
sumers for in home and out of home consumption (22%)  Increases in extreme weather events are likely to have 
negative impacts on the availability of food nationally & 
globally - resulting in price increases  
Land made available to increase biodiversity will reduce 
the amount of land available for food production  Developing a vibrant and diverse sustainable food econo-
my in Dorset , which includes exotic food previously not grown 
in UK  
Change in land use to deliver climate change mitigation 
and adaptation where farm business restructuring allows  
Reduced air pollution due to reduced transportation of food  
Improve local diets and reduce weight and health problems 
as a result of a healthier eating  
Tackle food poverty through food waste reduction activities  
Provide a basis for secure livelihoods by aligning food pro-
duction to agroecological or regenerative principles  
Food production in Dorset directly employs 5,974 peo-
ple, which is 9.8% of the total employed in the sector in the 
southwest  
Figure 28  Figure 27   
 FOOD & DRINK  
Areas for Action...  
Dorset Council must work towards reducing our carbon emissions output, food poverty and the level of waste produced, all whil e meeting the in-
creasing demand for food. To do so, we must facilitate change by establishing the following direct, indirect and influential initiatives...  
Direct  Indirect (through services)  Influence & Partnership  
Work with Council tenants and con-
cessions to reduce food waste and 
promote less packaging  
Continued adoption of the Council ’s 
single use plastic policy throughout 
its estate, operations, tenants and 
concessions  Work with partners to reduce meat 
and increase plant -based meals in 
care homes and schools  
Reduce use of fertilizers on Council 
land by increased use of locally pro-
duced compost  Increase range of edible fruits, flow-
ers, and vegetables in Council 
owned parks, rooftops, and open 
spaces  Work with Council tenants and con-
cessionaires to reduce the sale of 
products with high GHG emissions  
Develop funding scheme to improve 
the efficiency of Council (Tricuro 
sites / other care homes) and 
schools ’ catering equipment, and 
switch to electric sources to allow 
for carbon neutral catering  Continue to work with producers and 
partners to promote 'local food' and 
reduce food miles  
Promote home growing and allot-
ments to Dorset residents  
Explore the adoption of tools to help 
engage school staff (and potentially 
students) to create low -carbon 
meals, with consideration of ingredi-
ents, food miles, and cooking meth-
ods  
Work with partners to help food and 
drink suppliers within Dorset to be 
resilient to climate change  Promote Green Kitchen Standard &  
Food for Life to Dorset businesses  
Work with partners to promote low -
carbon affordable food options to 
Dorset residents  
Work with County Farm tenants to 
encourage the adoption of more 
climate and wildlife friendly practic-
es Work to develop opportunities for 
enhancing Dorset ’s ecological net-
works   
/ 35 
 View detailed action plan  Read full discussion paper on Food & Drink   FOOD & DRINK  
/ 36 In 2018 South West based insurance company Cornish Mu-
tual launched their Real Food Heroes campaign , celebrat-
ing the people behind the produce.  
The campaign puts the spot-
light on farms (large and 
small) and rural businesses 
across the South West that 
are behind the high quality 
food and drink that comes 
out of the region.  Real Food 
Heroes came about after in-
dependent market research, commissioned by Cornish Mutu-
al, found that many consumers in the South West wanted lo-
cal farmers and producers to be recognised.  
One in three South West consumers said they were buying 
more local produce than in previous years and the top reason 
given was wanting to support local farmers.  
Since its launch, Cornish Mutual continues to celebrate and 
share stories of its Real Food Heroes - the individuals who 
strive to produce and provide quality food and drink for their 
local communities.  #RealFoodHeroes  Local Food Links Ltd  is a social enterprise based in 
Bridport. The organisation was  established in 2006 and sup-
plies freshly prepared school meals, using local ingredients 
and employing local people.   School meals were absent from 
Dorset primary schools for around 20 years and many 
schools no longer had kitchens.   In 2005, when the govern-
ment announced that all schools must provide hot meals, 
Dorset as a county had the task of re -introducing hot 
meals.   Local Food Links was able to offer schools without 
kitchens a more sustainable alternative to trucking meals 200 
miles down from Nottingham – hub kitchens were formed and 
meals were freshly produced 
each day and driven a short dis-
tance to local schools.  
There are now four hub kitchens 
supplying 56 schools across Dor-
set with around 4,200 meals a 
day.  LFL works in partnership 
with schools and has a bespoke 
online ordering service that works 
for schools and parents.   78% of ingredients are purchased 
from Dorset suppliers and 95% from the South West.    
Case Study: Cornish Mutual ’s Real  
Food Heroes  Case Study: Local Food Links  Scale of the challenge...  
The commercial and industrial sector is a significant contributor to cli-
mate change and accounts for just under a quarter of the county ’s 
emissions.   
In order to transition to net -zero we will need to create a zero -carbon 
economy  here in Dorset. This means that emissions from the county ’s 
commercial & industrial sector, which in 2017 amounted to 433 kilo-
tons of CO 2e, will need to be eliminated whilst making sure the coun-
ty’s economy still thrives.   
To do this Dorset businesses will need to reduce their energy con-
sumption and increase their self -supply of renewable energy.  All com-
mercial buildings will need to become net -zero, all water use will need 
to be reduced, and all emissions from travel will need to decrease.  
Businesses will also have their role to play in the development of a cir-
cular economy in Dorset,  by making products and materials more effi-
ciently. This will also require making sure that waste is designed out 
and re -use is designed in.  
Support and growth for Dorset ’s low -carbon sector will be essential.  It 
is predicted that the low carbon economy has the potential to grow by 
11% a year in the lead up to 2030, four times faster than the rest of the 
economy. The national drive to reduce emissions offers a significant 
economic opportunity for the development of low -carbon goods and 
services, and Dorset will need to take full advantage of it.  
Furthermore, whilst economic activities have an impact on climate 
change, it also works the other way around.  Climate change poses a  
/ 37 ECONOMY  
significant threat to the economy, particularly through flooding and dis-
ruption of supply chains and infrastructure.  Businesses in Dorset will 
need to be fully supported to become more resilient to these risks.   
Dorset ’s progress so far … 
Dorset ’s commercial and industrial emissions decreased by 46% 
between 2005 and 2017, mostly due to grid decarbonisation  
Since 2017 Dorset Council ’s Low Carbon Dorset  programme 
has supported 80 businesses to invest over £4.8m in low -carbon 
projects, saving 3,719 tCO 2e a year & increasing renewable en-
ergy capacity by 3.4 MW p. 
Dorset LEP ’s vision for economy already outlines objectives to 
deliver the UK Government ’s ‘Clean Growth Grand Challenge ’ 
Dorset Innovation Park developments offers local firms the 
chance to expand and relocate in Dorset  
Get a full overview of Dorset ’s economy and the businesses operating 
within it in Dorset Council ’s Local Economic Assessment...  
Hear more about Dorset ’s 
economy and the challenges 
and opportunities we are fac-
ing from Dorset Council ’s 
Economic Growth and  
Regeneration Manager...  / 38 ECONOMY  
Key Issues...  Key Opportunities...  
Nationally  In Dorset  
Low carbon & renewable energy economy (LCREE) is 
growing slowly and has been affected over recent years by 
changing legislation and incentive schemes  
Circular economy at early stages of development and is 
heavily influenced by national policy and regulation  
Many businesses operate from leased buildings,  where 
there is often not a benefit to landlords to invest in building 
fabric or renewable energy technologies  
Low Carbon Dorset (DC ’s current business support pro-
gramme) set to finish in 2021 if additional funds are not 
secured  Business investment models often seek short term re-
turn on investment making many carbon -reduction activi-
ties cost prohibitive due to long ROIs  
Lack of understanding and awareness of low -carbon 
options and technologies amongst businesses & they often 
don’t have resource to investigate and implement them  
Additional Business Rates levy introduced by govern-
ment increases business rate for those that install re-
newable energy on their premises – this acts as a signifi-
cant barrier to investment  
Dorset ’s predominantly rural nature leads to extensive 
reliance on private transport  mainly cars  
Dorset ’s lack of transport infrastructure, location, and 
protected high quality landscape lends itself to high value 
low-volume manufacture and service industries  
Dorset ’s protected landscape designations add to the 
regulatory issues involved in installing renewable energy  
Increase in jobs & skill development opportunities within 
Low Carbon Renewable Energy Economy (LCREE) needed  
to respond to the scale of action required  
Responding to climate emergency will open up / expand 
markets for Dorset businesses in the low carbon econo-
my and offer major opportunities for green economy growth  
Opportunity to scale up the successful Low Carbon Dor-
set programme and use proven case studies of energy effi-
ciency and renewable energy projects to accelerate replication 
across county  
Opportunity to encourage low -carbon builds and renewa-
ble energy infrastructure at Dorset Innovation Park as 
Dorset Council is both land owner of site and planning authority  
Dorset has a strong high -tech sector which can take ad-
vantage of clean growth  through diversification and skills  
Potential to attract more skilled, higher paid jobs and 
tackle social deprivation through low -carbon sector growth  
Dorset Council can use its procurement function to prior-
itise social and environmental wellbeing as well as eco-
nomic value  
Dorset Broadband programme can help to strengthen 
Dorset ’s digital infrastructure & enable development of in-
novative ICT solutions to reduce travel  
Opportunity to make sure tourism facilities are devel-
oped in areas accessible without the need for a car  
through DC ’s planning function  
COVID 19 recovery programmes could lead to injections 
of finance, these could be invested in low -carbon tech-
nologies  for long -term business cost reduction and to support 
key sectors in Dorset  
 ECONOMY  
Areas for Action...  
Dorset Council cannot singlehandedly eliminate the emissions from the county's economic activities, but it can work with part ners, influence ser-
vices, and develop existing programmes to drive the step -change needed to transition to a zero -carbon -economy in Dorset.  
Direct  Indirect (through services)  Influence & Partnership  
Ensure Dorset Council procurement 
supports sustainable development 
by prioritising social & environmen-
tal wellbeing as well as economic 
value  
Build renewable energy infrastruc-
ture at Dorset Innovation Park  Support the expansion of the Dor-
set Innovation Park to become a 
centre of excellence in clean growth  
Support greater deployment and 
strengthen high -speed broadband 
and ICT infrastructure in the county 
through Dorset ’s Broadband pro-
gramme.  And enable businesses to 
increase home working and reduce 
travel  
Promote the low -carbon economy 
and encourage investment in green 
jobs and businesses in Dorset  Maximise opportunities for clean 
growth in Dorset by working with busi-
nesses & partners to put at centre of 
local economic development plans  
Support Dorset ’s strong high -tech 
sector to diversify & take advantage of 
growth in low carbon sector  
Work with partners to attract green 
sector businesses with highly skilled 
workforces to Dorset  
Help businesses be more resilient to 
climate change through our planning 
& flood risk management functions  
Work with the tourism sector to devel-
op specific programmes of support for 
sustainable tourism & make Dorset a 
low-carbon tourism destination  
Read Dorset Council ’s full discussion paper on Economy here  
Support businesses to become 
more energy and resource efficient 
and to install renewable energy by 
working with partners to expand 
Low Carbon Dorset programme  
Use potential COVID -19 recovery 
funds to provide investment in low -
carbon technologies for key sectors  
/ 39 Figure 29  
View detailed action plan  Read full discussion paper on Economy   ECONOMY  
/ 40 Low Carbon Dorset  is a three -year pro-
gramme of activities to help stimulate 
growth in Dorset ’s low carbon economy 
and reduce its carbon footprint.  The pro-
gramme offers free technical support and 
grant funding for energy efficiency and re-
newable energy projects to businesses, 
public -sector and community organisa-
tions in Dorset.  
The programme is led by Dorset Council 
and the Dorset Area of Outstanding Natu-
ral Beauty (AONB) and funded by the European Regional De-
velopment Fund (ERDF).   
Since its launch in 2019 the programme has given out 91 
grants worth over £2m.  And has provided free advice to over 
100 Dorset based organisations.  This support has helped 
save just under 4,000 tonnes of CO 2 a year.  
The programme has recently submitted a bid for an additional 
£4.26m of funding from the ERDF which, if awarded, will 
bring Low Carbon Dorset ’s value to £14.9m.   If successful in 
this bid the programme will be extended until June 2023.    
Read more on the Low Carbon Dorset website . 
In 2019, English Oak Vineyard were crowned Dorset Envi-
ronmental Business Of The Year.  This award recognises 
businesses who are leading the way to improve their environ-
mental performance and value Dorset ’s natural assets in their 
operations.  
English Oak Vineyard won the award as a result of their sus-
tainable approach to winemaking.  This was demonstrated 
through their efforts to drastically reduce their carbon foot-
print and their focus on environmental protection.    
As an organisation they actively 
market to local businesses in order 
to reduce the miles their products 
travel. Their electricity is generated 
by on -site solar panels which also 
charge their 100% electric vehicle 
fleet.  The vineyard also uses 
‘recycle spraying ’ equipment and sources organic feeds to 
ensure responsible vineyard management.  In addition all 
their water is sourced from an on -site well.  
Care of wildlife is also a key focus for the vineyard with bee -
hives dotted around the site, and their minimal fencing allows 
wildlife to roam freely amongst the rows of vines.   
Case Study: Low Carbon Dorset  Case Study: English Oak Vineyard  / 41  
 WASTE  
Dorset ’s progress so far … 
Hear more about the challenge we are facing, 
and our current activities from our  
Head of Commercial Waste & Strategy...  
As a newly formed Council we are currently gathering data on our own 
waste and associated emissions. But to get an idea of scale, in 2019 
the county council alone generated 1,201 tonnes of waste.  We need to 
reduce this amount as much as possible, and implement a robust and 
consistent approach to managing and monitoring waste across all of 
our operations and sites, recycling and reusing as much as possible.  
Scale of the challenge...  
To reduce the carbon impact from our waste activities, Dorset must 
work towards creating a more sustainable and efficient circular econo-
my. This means reducing the amount of waste we produce by keeping 
resources in use for as long as possible and recovering and reusing 
products and materials wherever we can.  
At present, Dorset (including Bournemouth, Christchurch and Poole) 
generates 1.6 million tonnes of waste each year . Estimated trajecto-
ries in the Dorset Waste Plan predict this figure will continue to grow.  
Nearly half of Dorset ’s waste is categorised as either construction, 
demolition, excavation or hazardous. And the remaining 52% (around 
840,000 tonnes) is split between household waste and commercial & 
industrial waste.  
As Dorset Council has key statutory functions for household waste we 
have an opportunity to further drive the development of a circular econ-
omy here. And encourage and support the reduction, reuse and recy-
cling of waste across the county. The Council has made good progress 
by harmonising collection services, increasing the recycling rate year 
on year and curbing waste growth through waste -reduction initiatives, 
but the scale of this challenge remains significant. Last year Dorset 
households produced 174,002 tonnes of waste resulting in the emis-
sion of 18,768 tonnes of CO 2e.  
Commercial & industrial waste figures are harder to estimate as most 
of this waste is collected and managed by private companies, making 
access to accurate data more difficult. But it is estimated that it ac-
counts for around half of all waste produced in Dorset.  The recycling rate in Dorset is 59.6%, putting Dorset in the top 
3 comparable authorities in England  
70% reduction in household waste sent to landfill in last 10 
years, saving around £3.3m each year  
Top performing Council in England, Wales & Northern Ireland 
for Eunmia ’s Local Authority Recycling Carbon Index  
Targeted campaigns delivered by Dorset Waste Service to help 
households reduce their waste  
Incentives placed in waste disposal contracts to encourage 
waste to be treated rather than landfilled  
All of Dorset ’s household organic waste is now treated within 
the county using anaerobic digestion  Find out more about Dorset Council ’s current approach to waste in our 
Joint Municipal Waste Strategy 2008 -2033  (last reviewed in  2017)  and 
our Local Waste Plan . 
/ 42 WASTE  
Key Issues...  
Nationally  In Dorset  
National schemes are still emerging to support the new 
UK waste strategy and a transition to a circular economy  
Maximising the use of the Recycle for Dorset service for 
residents and continuing to influence behavioural change to 
reduce waste further  
Key Opportunities...  
Limited oversight and influence over Commercial & In-
dustrial waste due to a competitive market and commercial-
ly sensitive data  Dorset Council was only formed in 2019 , meaning we are 
currently compiling a full picture of waste streams & associat-
ed emissions, and we do not currently have a consistent ap-
proach to managing waste from our business activities  
Significant level of investment required for new local 
waste facilities  Lack of economic drivers for the commercial and industrial 
sectors to recycle and reuse waste  
Lack of effective tools to stop littering and create sustained 
behavioural change  
Substantial cost savings could be achieved if fly-tipping in-
cidents reduced  Opportunities for change in shorter time frame  as a result 
of collection service undertaken in -house & shorter waste con-
tracts in place (7 years compared to typical Local Authority 
waste contract of 20 -25 years)  
Dorset Waste Plan provides the framework for bringing 
forward new sites  to address the need for new local facilities  Life span of products getting shorter —despite advances 
in technology the average life span of many products we buy 
and use in daily life is lower than 20 years ago  
An estimated 10 million tonnes of food & drink wasted 
post-farm gate every year  Opportunity as a new unitary council to review our internal 
waste management practices and implement one robust 
scheme across all of our operations to reduce waste, reuse, 
recycle & recover as much as possible  
Opportunity to influence and implement the resources 
and waste strategy for England  through extended producer 
responsibility, consistency in recycling collections and the de-
posit return scheme  
Figure 30   WASTE  
Areas for Action...  
Dorset Council aims to reduce the amount of waste that is generated in Dorset as much as possible and move to a circular econ omy model. There 
are direct, indirect, and influential initiatives that we can establish, that will help us to facilitate this change.  
Direct  Indirect (through services)  Influence & Partnership  
Carry out internal waste audits across 
our operations & create waste reduc-
tion plan supported by targeted cam-
paigns  
Continue to work towards our com-
mitment to become single -use plastic -
free & eliminate the use of all single 
life products  Establish appropriate infrastructure to 
support circular economy as part of 
Joint Municipal Waste Management 
Strategy for Dorset 2008 – 33.  
Develop business plan to tackle food 
waste within Council premises, with a 
particular focus on schools & adult 
services  Ensure waste is minimised through 
procurement e.g. DC suppliers to 
take back packaging or use reusable 
packaging systems  Develop targeted campaigns to re-
duce amount of waste produced and 
increase reuse & recycling  
Trial a ‘not sure ’ box and use results 
to inform residents what can or can-
not be recycled  Respond to second round of consul-
tations relating to the resources & 
waste strategy for England  
Investigate how Dorset Waste Ser-
vices can work with partners to facili-
tate reduction of commercial and in-
dustrial waste  
Continue to engage with public, com-
munities, schools & businesses to 
increase understanding of waste is-
sues & best practices  
Develop further campaigns to reduce 
the amount of waste generated & 
stimulate further reuse, recycling & 
composting  
Work with Waste manager to reduce 
emissions from waste collection vehi-
cles  Trial provision of free/subsidised food
-waste caddy liners in specific areas  
Explore opportunity for increased 
commercial waste services  
Develop a contract & infrastructure 
strategy to enable the most efficient 
and cost -effective solution for Dorset  
Introduce a pilot project in partner-
ship with Keep Britain Tidy to reduce 
food waste  
/ 43 Read Dorset Council ’s full discussion paper on Waste here  Ensure sufficient contracts are in 
place to reuse, recycle & recover as 
much Council waste as possible  
Continue to work with the Police, EA 
& community groups to reduce litter-
ing & fly tipping  
View detailed action plan  Read full discussion paper on Waste   WASTE  
/ 44 Dorset Council ’s Recycling Team works tirelessly to help 
the public reduce, reuse and recycle their waste correctly. 
And recently won ‘Team of the Year ’ at the Local Authority 
Recycling Advisory Committee Awards.     
Through good team 
working, excellent 
internal and exter-
nal partnerships, 
great communica-
tions, focus on 
schools, proven 
projects and campaigns, the kerbside recycling rate has con-
tinued to increase to one of the highest in the country at 59%, 
generating estimated savings of over £90k in the last year.     
Each Recycling Officer is linked with an operations depot and 
identifies areas requiring improvement, using limited re-
sources to produce significant benefits to the environment, 
council budgets.  
Successful campaigns and activities have included ‘Right 
Stuff Right Bin ’, ’Love Food Hate Waste ’, ’Slim Your Bin ’ com-
munal container improvements, recycling hangers on wheelie 
bins and food waste stickering and tagging.   Highways waste is the largest of our waste streams with high 
embedded carbon. In order to reduce these emissions, our 
Highways team is working on an exciting project with supply 
chain partner,  Allasso  Recycling, based at Corfe Mullen.   
Allasso  re-process our asphalt waste into sustainable surfac-
ing and recycled materials, which are fed back as a raw mate-
rial into our resurfacing 
schemes and sold to the 
community for use in local 
projects. This cuts down on 
the use of raw materials, 
and their associated emis-
sions, and by making the 
surfacing locally we reduce 
emissions from transport.     
The sustainable surfacing 
has the same performance 
as conventional material and 
is a lower cost.   So this part-
nership will significantly re-
duce the cost and emissions from the large improvement 
schemes planned for this year.  
Case Study: Recycling Team Award  Case Study: Using Recycled  
Materials for Highways  / 45  WATER  
Scale of the challenge...  
When it comes to contributing to emissions water plays a relatively 
small role (only 0.8% of the UK ’s footprint). But the effects that climate 
change will have on it will be extensive, affecting the availability of wa-
ter resources and significantly increasing risk to water quality.   
By 2050 steps will need to be taken, led by the water industry, to sig-
nificantly reduce demand for water, reduce wastage and manage wa-
ter resources in ways that eliminate emissions and protect them for 
the future.  
Data shows that Dorset residents each use around 131 litres of wa-
ter every day .  To reduce this demand we will need to change the 
way we use water, making use of the latest technologies and improv-
ing the county ’s water efficiency. There will also need to be a greater 
awareness amongst households and businesses of water issues.  
The Council will need to take action to reduce its own water demand, 
which last year amounted to around 261,644 m3 of water resulting in 
the emission of 275 tonnes of CO 2e. 
Along with our daily consumption of water we also need to take into 
account the vast amounts of water used to produce consumer goods 
- 1kg of beef uses 15,415 litres!  Our total water footprint is therefore 
much greater than simply the water we use at home and work, and to 
reduce this we will need to carefully consider our purchasing options.   
Another challenge for Dorset will be the significant effect on local flood 
risks as a result of increases in rainfall.  As Lead Local Flood Authority 
and Coastal Management Authority, Dorset Council will have a  Dorset ’s progress so far … 
A series of flood investigations & flood alleviation interventions 
have been developed over last decade. The most notable a 
£750k scheme installing resilience measures to 94 homes  
A Local Flood Risk Management Strategy developed which 
sets the direction of Council ’s work  
Substantial work is being done by water companies in Dorset 
to reduce leakage  
Water companies have been supporting Dorset customers to 
reduce water use through services such as Wessex Water ’s 
‘home check service ’.  
Around 3/4 of Dorset households have a water meter installed  
Dorset Wild Rivers project (2015 -2020) funded by Wessex Wa-
ter aims to achieve restoration of river habitats and enhance 
wetlands  
Former County Council led ongoing programme to install water 
efficiency measures (such as waterless urinals, water saving 
taps & rainwater harvesting)  significant role to play in flood risk management, alleviation and mitiga-
tion work.   
Wessex Water  South West Water  Find out more about Dorset ’s water 
suppliers and the work they are  
doing in the area...  
Hear more about this work from our  
flood management team leader   
  
 WATER  
Key Issues...  
Nationally  In Dorset  
Lots of old buildings in Dorset that may not have drain-
age systems that can accommodate increased rainfall 
predicted with climate change  
Key Opportunities...  
Dorset Council can lead by example by reducing water us-
age on own estate  
Most of the action is required at an industry level  
Less than half of the rivers of Dorset are considered 
‘good ’ water quality under current European standards  
Despite greatly improved waste water treatment, dif-
fuse nutrient pollution from agriculture remains a major 
problem in the coastal and marine environment  Many products produced by industry still use vast 
amounts of water, including the food and farming industries  Limited powers to enforce the installation of water con-
servation measures in new developments or higher stand-
ards beyond Building Regulations  
Water reduction in Dorset is heavily reliant on behav-
iour change by residents and businesses  Use of latest water conservation technologies in new 
builds through Council ’s Planning & Building control functions  Partnership working with water companies and the Envi-
ronment Agency to encourage and support businesses to re-
duce water use and wastage  
Share best practice in water resource management, pro-
tection and water ecology through the development and pro-
motion of case studies  Reduced water bills for residents & businesses as a result 
of water efficiency  
Climate change expected to affect availability of water 
and increase risk of water pollution and localised flood-
ing within Dorset  Around 3 billion litres of water a day is lost through 
leakage in UK – approx. 22% of all water put into supply  
/ 46 Reduce future surface water flood risk from future devel-
opments through partnership working with developers, local 
planning authorities, highway authorities and water & sewage 
companies, by maximising uptake of Sustainable Urban Drain-
age (SuDS) solutions  
Showers are biggest water user in most UK homes  Water availability is often a key controlling  factor  in  
biodiversity  with aquatic organisms and groundwater de-
pendent terrestrial ecosystems at risk of being directly affect-
ed  
Figure 31   WATER  
Areas for Action...  
Water is a defining characteristic for Dorset and it is critical that Dorset Council takes action through its own operations,  services and influence to 
encourage a reduction in Dorset ’s water demand and wastage, and the management of water resources.  
Direct  Indirect (through services)  Influence & Partnership  
Make Dorset Council buildings 
more water efficient, by installing 
technologies such as flow regula-
tors, water efficient toilets and 
showerheads  
Ensure procurement specification 
favours water efficient equipment  Ensure water use is minimised and 
reuse is optimised in new develop-
ments  
Carry out in -depth assessment of 
water leaks across Council ’s estate  Reduce / replace demand on mains 
water within Dorset Council buildings 
by installing technologies such as 
rainwater harvesting and grey water 
systems  Work with County Farms and Green 
Spaces to ensure land manage-
ment practices protect water sup-
plies 
Ensure Dorset Council land man-
agement practices prevent water 
pollution  Liaise with water companies to en-
sure water leaks are identified and 
eliminated in Dorset  
Work with Environment Agency to 
ensure all high risk industrial and 
farming areas in Dorset have been 
identified and appropriate pollution 
prevention measures are in place  
Work with partners to promote land 
management practices that prevent 
polluting water courses and ensure 
good water management  
Work with partners to ensure climate 
resilience is being addressed and 
sufficient supplies of good quality 
water will be available for Dorset res-
idents 
Carry out audit of all Council sites 
holding materials hazardous to water 
quality to ensure correct storage is 
in place & ensure pollution preven-
tion equipment is properly main-
tained  
Identify areas at risk from local 
sources of flooding and ensure 
these are considered in the future  
Maintenance of ordinary water-
courses by riparian owners to help 
reduce the risk of flooding  
/ 47 Read Dorset Council ’s full discussion paper on Water here  
View detailed action plan  Read full discussion paper on Water  WATER  
/ 48 Dorset Council is a partner in the Dorset Wild Rivers Pro-
ject; a major river and wetland restoration project that takes a 
collaborative  catchment based  approach.    
It is led by Dorset Wildlife Trust and focuses on the Frome and 
Piddle Valleys and the chalk stream tributaries of the Dorset 
Stour Valley.  
The project helps farmers and landowners identify opportuni-
ties for habitat restoration or creation, whilst delivering in -river 
habitat enhancements and water quality improvements. This 
can benefit both aquatic plants and 
animals and will deliver Water 
Framework Directive targets.   
This collaborative approach aims to 
reduce the decline of wetland biodi-
versity with particular attention giv-
en to white clawed crayfish, water 
vole, otter, salmon and brown trout.  
Since 2015, the project has sup-
ported the creation of 135 hectares 
of habitat, the restoration and enhancement of 14 ponds and 
18km of river, and 1926m of hedge work in Dorset.  Dorset Council ’s flood risk management team act as Statu-
tory Planning Consultee in the management of surface water 
for major development proposals.  The effects of climate 
change on rainfall patterns will see more extreme events be-
coming more common. And it is against this background that 
the use of sustainable drainage systems (SuDS) techniques 
need to be promoted, so as to 
mimic a more natural drainage 
system and deal with flooding 
issues as close as possible to 
the source. This can only be 
achieved by early engagement with developers.  
In support of this, we have been developing flood risk and 
SuDS policies within the new Dorset Council Local Plan. This 
has involved researching similar policies across the South 
West to select the best for Dorset, setting up a SuDS working 
group and adopting pioneering constraint mapping to help 
inform decision making on development allocations / pro-
posals.  
SuDS techniques are generally more cost effective than be-
low the ground traditional drainage systems and have a lower 
construction carbon footprint.  
Case Study: Dorset Wild Rivers  
Project  Case Study: Promotion of Sustaina-
ble Drainage Systems (SuDS) for 
new developments  
/ 49 NATURAL ASSETS  
Scale of the challenge...  
Natural Assets, which can be described collectively as Natural Capi-
tal, play a critical role in providing services that are vital for the physi-
cal wellbeing of the population, such as clean air, water, and healthy 
soils. This is as well as the natural regulation of hazards, such as 
flooding.  
The productive capacity of our Natural Assets underpins the whole 
economy. And how we manage the demands on our Natural Capital is 
key to ensuring the quality and diversity of our ecology.  
Biodiversity – the diversity within species, between species and of 
ecosystems – is declining globally. The world ’s 7.6 billion people rep-
resent just 0.01% of all living things by weight, but humanity has 
caused the loss of 83% of all wild mammals and half of all plants.  
The significant proportion of Dorset (53%) has been designated for 
conservation as an Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty. Dorset is one 
of the most important counties for wildlife, with 141 Sites of Special 
Scientific Interest, covering an area of 199.45 km2, 11 National Na-
ture Reserves (NNRs), and 1,254 Sites of Nature Conservation Inter-
est (SNCIs).  
In addition, 23 sites are recognised to be of international or European 
importance (SACs, SPAs, and RAMSAR sites) and there are also 63 
Regionally Important Geological Sites (RIGS) and 45 Local Nature Re-
serves (LNRs).  
Therefore, in order to protect our Natural Assets, Dorset Council must 
work towards meeting several objectives, which include raising funds  Dorset ’s progress so far … 
Hear more about Dorset Council ’s changes to 
verge management from our Greenspaces 
Team Manager...  
AONB & Natural Environment teams within the Council are lead-
ing on a variety of projects to protect & enhance biodiversity  
Natural England has developed Accessible Natural Greenspace 
Standard (ANGSt), providing local authorities with a detailed 
guide as to what constitutes accessible green space  
Dorset AONB team are currently looking at how future agricul-
tural support from government can help deliver their ambitions  
Dorset Council currently meeting mitigation requirements by off-
setting impact of residential development  
Biodiversity Appraisal Protocol (BAP) set up to ensure there is 
an integrated approach to planning & development  
In 2016 Dorset County Council adopted Pollinators Action Plan 
to reduce the decline in pollinating insects —which DC now op-
erate  
New ecologically beneficial approach to verge management ap-
proved by Dorset County Council in 2014 & has been progres-
sively rolled out across the County  to facilitate habitat gain and furthermore improve the quality and pro-
tection its species.  
This is as well as increasing sequestration, using land to increase resili-
ence to climate change, and ensuring that future management and 
maintenance are financially sustainable.  
/ 50 NATURAL ASSETS  
Key Issues...  
Nationally  Biodiversity (the diversity within species, between spe-
cies and of ecosystems)  is declining globally , faster than 
at any other time in human history  
Intensive agriculture reduces the flows of most ecosys-
tem services , including flood protection, water quality, car-
bon storage, soil quality, and provision of habitat for wildlife  
Key Opportunities...  
Increase use of non -intervention management/rewilding 
techniques on Council land to improve connectivity of high 
ecological value areas  
Overall, 47% of local Dorset businesses stated that they 
were dependent on ecosystem service flows in some 
way Carbon storage by changes in land use has increased 
by 98% from -53 ktCO 2 in 2005 to -105 ktCO 2 in 2017, re-
sulting in net sequestration of carbon  The use of land for more intensive agriculture, urbani-
sation, and afforestation resulted in the loss and fragmen-
tation of many semi -natural habitats  
Climate change, combined with other social, economic, 
and environmental pressures, will present significant 
risks to the services provided by the land  
The UK population is predicted to increase by nine mil-
lion by 2050 , increasing the area of land required for settle-
ments  Increase area of land owned and managed for ecological 
and carbon sequestration outcomes using various planning 
gains  
Ensure ecological quality is considered in flood manage-
ment & highway schemes  - e.g. Weymouth Relief  Road  
Work with tenants of County Farms to promote and ensure 
best environmental practices are upheld  
Promote the Health and Wellbeing benefits of publicly ac-
cessible high ecological value land  
Prioritise ecological & carbon sequestration value in the 
design of the built environment through planning process  In Dorset  Insert Picture  
Figure 32  
Figure 33  To ensure community tree planting initiatives are ecolog-
ically robust and sensitive to the local landscape ‘right tree in 
the right place ’  
Increased tree planting where suitable to avoid detrimental 
effects on other habitat types or landscape  
NATURAL ASSETS  
Areas for Action...  
Natural Assets play a critical role in providing services that are vital for the physical wellbeing of the population, such a s clean air, water, and healthy 
soils, as well as the natural regulation of hazards, such as flooding. Therefore, Dorset Council must towards meeting several  direct, indirect, and in-
fluential objectives to protect these Natural Assets.   
Direct  Indirect (through services)  Influence & Partnership  
Identify opportunities to use Dorset 
Council land to increase resilience to 
climate change  
Increase biodiversity on identified ar-
eas of Council land  
Increase area of Council owned or 
managed land for ecological & car-
bon sequestration outcomes  Develop / adopt biodiversity, green & 
open spaces supplementary planning 
document to ensure a consistent ap-
proach for developers to take up pro-
tection & enhancement measures of 
key biodiverse areas  Communicate to residents, business, 
& landowners good practice  
Creation of wildlife friendly areas on 
council land (incl. bee -friendly zones)  
Increase hedge & woodland planting 
through Dormouse District Licence 
project  
Use the financial contributions from 
development raised through Nitrates 
Supplementary Planning Document to 
buy land for rewilding / tree planting / 
creation of rough grassland and scrub  
/ 51 Promote tree planting through part-
nership working & use of Council tree 
planting checklist  
Promote the health & wellbeing bene-
fits of publicly accessible high ecologi-
cal value land  
Review all chemical use to ensure no 
harm to unintended species  
Expand cut & collect verge manage-
ment  
Ensure all decision making around 
use of natural assets is based upon 
ecological value  
Increase tree planting where suitable 
to avoid detrimental effects on other 
habitat types or landscape  
Work in partnership with Children ’s & 
Adult Services to ensure natural envi-
ronment is fully utilised in social care 
offer 
Work with partners to connect frag-
mented habitats across county  
Manage heathlands SPD – SANGS in -
house to provide additional areas for 
ecological & carbon sequestration 
purposes  
Work with tenants of County Farms to 
promote and ensure best environmen-
tal practices are upheld  Develop guidance to ensure commu-
nity tree planting initiatives are ecolog-
ically robust & sensitive to local land-
scape (‘right tree in the right place ’) 
Work with town & parish councils to 
promote best practice within their 
greenspace & communities  
View detailed action plan  Read full discussion paper on Natural Assets   NATURAL ASSETS  
/ 52 Since the 1930s the UK has seen a 97% reduction in wild-
flower meadows.  The management of verges offers a huge 
opportunity to help compensate for this loss.   
Over the last few years, Dorset Council has significantly 
changed the way we manage our verges to do more to pro-
tect, conserve and enhance the verges in Dorset for biodiver-
sity.  One of these changes is the increase in ‘cut and col-
lect’ mowing - where we collect grass clippings instead of 
letting them rot down into the soil. Collecting clippings reduc-
es the soil fertility, resulting in lower growth rates, longer peri-
ods between cutting and a far better environment for wild-
flowers to establish and 
thrive; in some examples 
a reduction from 7 cuts a 
year to just 2 has been 
achieved within towns 
and verges full of wild-
flowers. This reduction in 
cutting allows wildflowers 
the time to complete their 
life cycles which benefits bees and other pollinators.  It also 
reduces emissions from mowers and vehicles transporting 
clippings.  Read more here  Dorset Local Nature Partnership (LNP) works to maximise 
the benefits of Dorset ’s environment for wildlife, people and 
the economy.   Developed by Dorset Environmental Record 
Centre, Dorset LNP has published an update to its Ecological 
Network Maps.   These 
maps show the existing 
network of known sites of 
wildlife importance, habi-
tats that are valuable for 
wildlife and areas that 
are not currently of high 
nature value but offer the 
highest potential to be 
managed or enhanced.     
These maps will be used to support work on both nature -
based climate solutions and nature recovery to address the 
climate and ecological emergencies.   They will inform plan-
ning decisions to ensure we enhance our environment and 
guide action to restore nature within the county, such as 
large -scale restoration projects or improved connectivity with 
existing sites.   
Read more here  
Case Study: Verge Management  Case Study: Dorset LNP - Ecological 
Network Map  / 53 TRANSPORT  
Scale of the challenge...  
Due to its dependency on fossil fuels the transport sector is a major 
contributor to our nation ’s carbon footprint.  Decarbonising this sector 
will be a key challenge in moving towards a zero -carbon future.   
Here in Dorset transport alone is responsible for an estimated 765 kil-
otons of CO 2e each year, making it the single biggest contributor to 
our county ’s footprint. To reach zero carbon, fossil fuel use in the 
transport sector will need to be eliminated. This will not be as simple 
as just switching to different fuels or energy sources. It will require sig-
nificant changes in attitudes, planning and infrastructure, economic 
incentives and political and institutional changes.  
In rural areas like Dorset, car ownership is amongst the highest in the 
country. And in 2018 just over 2,500 million vehicle miles were trav-
elled in Dorset Council area.  A significant shift will be needed to make 
active travel and public transport the first transport mode of choice.  
This will be a significant challenge, in 2018 only 1% of UK passenger 
journeys were made on public transport.  
Transport will also need to be a key focus for Dorset Council in its own 
ambitions to eliminate emissions from its activities and services. 
Change will be required in the way staff commute to work, workplace 
practices, fleet operations and business travel.  
Over 9,000 Dorset Council employees currently commute to work.  
Changing commuter travel behaviour and achieving a shift from cars 
to more sustainable modes of transport will be required.  
Mileage undertaken by council staff on work business will also need to  Dorset ’s progress so far … 
Hear more about the challenges we are 
facing here in Dorset from Dorset Council ’s 
Transport Planning Manager...  
UK ban on the sale of new petrol and diesel cars by 2040, 
government consulting on earlier 2035 ban  
Dorset ’s Local Transport Plan already demonstrates a strong 
commitment to sustainable transport policies and carbon re-
duction  
662 tonnes of CO 2e have been saved since 2015 as a result 
of CarshareDorset.com car sharing scheme  
BCP Council & Dorset Council awarded £79 million in 2020 
by DfT ’s Transforming Cities fund to deliver large sustainable 
transport network  
be significantly reduced, last year this amounted to 5.3million miles, 
costing the council £1.6m and emitting 1,496 tonnes of CO 2e. 
The council ’s fleet vehicle emissions will also need to be eliminated, 
this will require a staged renewal programme to replace the existing 
fleet with electric or best possible alternative.   
To support the move to electric vehicles in both the Council fleet and 
the county there will need to be an increase in the provision of electric 
vehicle charging points.  This will require significant action from both 
public and private sectors in Dorset.  
/ 54  TRANSPORT  
Key Issues...  
Nationally  In Dorset  
Lack of national direction and strategy , although this will 
improve with the publication of the decarbonisation plan and 
bus strategy  
Inherited infrastructure network built around private 
vehicle usage which has led to the car being the first choice 
of travel  
Key Opportunities...  
Additional funding available from central government for 
buses funding, EV charging, active travel  
Culture of commuting to work with car being the default 
mode of travel  
Rural nature of parts of Dorset means that accessing em-
ployment, training and other essential services requires in-
creased travel  
Quality of digital infrastructure in rural areas to support 
home working, online learning and e -commerce  
Low carbon active travel infrastructure not sufficiently 
developed to complete area -wide networks  
Lack of funding to upgrade bus infrastructure and sup-
port rural services  
Lack of service frequency on some rail corridors , not 
suitable for commuting  Transport networks are closely interlinked so climate 
related disruption affecting one form of transport can have 
knock -on effects on others  
Relatively little overall change in the level of greenhouse 
gas emissions from the transport sector in last 20 years  Embed zero -carbon transition into statutory planning 
documents including the Local Plan & LTP  
Capitalise on private sector investment to expand public 
electric vehicle charging network  
Encourage continuation of behaviour & organisational 
changes that have resulted from COVID -19, including in-
creased active travel and home working  Greening of the council fleet utilising replacement pro-
gramme to transition to ULEVs  Reduced air pollution from transport  Increased health benefits from active travel with resulting 
impacts on wellbeing  
School choice contributes to transport issues  Creation of jobs in Dorset ’s green economy as a result of 
investment in zero carbon  
Figure 34  TRANSPORT  
Areas for Action...  
Decarbonising Dorset ’s transport sector will be a major step towards a net zero future, and significant action will be required from the Council t o 
eliminate associated emissions from its own activities & services, as well as working with partners and using its influence t o facilitate change on a 
county -wide level...  
Direct  Indirect (through services)  Influence & Partnership  
Maximise ultra -low-carbon vehicle 
replacement within Council fleet  
Provide EV charging points & other 
ultra-low-emission fuel alternatives 
across the Council property estate  Improve low -carbon transport infra-
structure by embedding it in the Local 
Plan and Transport Plan  
Encourage behavioural change in  
way staff travel to and for work  Reduce emissions from transport in-
frastructure construction and mainte-
nance  
Encourage decarbonisation of road 
transport through development of EV 
charging network & promotion of low 
emissions transport vehicles  Lobby government - e.g. for Rail im-
provements  
Respond to government calls and 
submit high quality grant applications  
Redirect investment from strategic 
road schemes to low -carbon 
transport (Work with Subnational 
Transport Body and Local Enterprise 
Partnership)  
Reduce the need for staff to travel to 
and for work  
Understand key risks and potential 
costs posed by climate change to 
transport & travel in Dorset  
Mainstream climate resilience in fu-
ture strategies and policies  
Increase investment in walking, cy-
cling & public transport infrastructure 
- secured through LTP, developer 
contributions, and other available 
funding streams  
Encourage behaviour change through 
active & sustainable travel campaigns 
and initiatives.  Improve quality & availability of public 
transport to make services more at-
tractive to the travelling public  Work with Dorset Business Travel 
Network & Digital Dorset to promote 
use of ICT to individuals and busi-
nesses to avoid travel & encourage 
working from home  
Ensure access to sustainable 
transport is considered in planning 
applications  
Work with schools, parents and part-
ners to reduce the carbon foot print 
of the daily school commute  
/ 55 
 View detailed action plan  Read full discussion paper on Transport  TRANSPORT  
/ 56 For the first time, this year will see Dorset Council using low 
energy asphalt (LEA) on all resurfacing schemes and as a 
surface course on new construction projects such as cy-
cleways.   
The material is produced 30 to 40 degrees lower than con-
ventional material, which is usually produced at 180 degrees. 
This reduced heat results in 15% less carbon emissions dur-
ing the production process.   
Although widely used in America 
and France, low energy asphalt is 
much less common in the UK.   
Councillor Ray Bryan, Portfolio 
Holder for Highways, Travel and 
Environment, said:  “Following two successful resurfacing 
schemes trialling LEA here in Dorset, we ’ve been very keen 
for mass -production of the material at the regional quarry, 
Whatley. Working closely with our private sector partner Han-
son UK this has become a reality. The quality of the lower en-
ergy material is not affected, it helps reduce our carbon foot-
print and it ’s actually easier to keep at temperature during 
transport due to the lower production temperature ”.  On average Dorset Council  pool-cars travel about five to six 
thousand miles each year. And it ’s estimated that each 
standard diesel pool -car produces between 1.4 and 1.7 
tonnes of CO 2 per year.   In 2013, Dorset Council introduced 
three electric cars into its pool -car fleet to reduce these emis-
sions.  
Electric vehicles produce no carbon emis-
sions in use, but do still have some associat-
ed emissions unless the electricity to re-
charge them comes from renewable 
sources.   
Compared to a standard diesel pool car that 
travels 5 -6k miles annually, its estimated that 
an electric equivalent travelling the same dis-
tance produces between 0.5 to 0.6 tonnes of 
CO 2 a year.  Since introducing the three elec-
tric pool -cars its estimated that the Council 
has saved around 10.5 tonnes of CO 2. There are opportuni-
ties to reduce emissions further by using only renewably 
sourced electricity and by increasing the number of electric 
pool-cars within the fleet.   
  
Case Study: Greener Highways  Case Study: Electric Pool Cars  MAKING IT HAPPEN  
Taking action to address the Climate and Ecological Emergency can-
not be done solely by officers working from the centre. It will need a 
multi -disciplinary approach, drawing on skills and resources from 
across the organisation and with wider partners. It will need to be part 
of the way we do things and embedded in the way we deliver our ser-
vices.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dorset Council have placed the Climate and Ecological Emergency at 
the heart of our Corporate Plan. This strategy document provides a 
framework for services to integrate our response to the climate emer-
gency into their planning. We will be using this paper as a driving force 
to move our approach to the climate emergency forward at pace.  
To make the strategy happen, there are several key things we need to 
put in place.  Leadership & Governance  
We will lobby government for additional resources and the national 
policy framework to support climate action in Dorset. In addition, we 
will actively input into national forums and consultations to encourage 
policy development in this area.  
We will ensure organisational structures are in place to take forward 
action across the Council. We will review our structures currently in 
place to develop this plan to ensure governance at the highest level, 
involving key decision -makers with a clear mandate for action. This is 
as well as ensuring all staff are aware of their responsibilities in the de-
livery of actions, and that departments are linked at a strategic level 
(e.g. waste and planning).  
We will ensure enough human resource is in place to drive forward 
action either through Council departments or involvement of wider 
partners.  
We will develop tools to undertake robust impact and policy appraisal 
to ensure climate change priorities and targets are considered in all 
key corporate projects, programmes, and strategies, and will utilise 
whole -life costing when assessing all capital projects.  
We will ensure climate emergency is embedded in our key strategies 
and plans, such as the developing Dorset Local Plan and our asset 
management plans.  
We will ensure we fully understand the risks of climate change on our 
business and that it is appropriately addressed within our risk man-
agement and business continuity processes.  
  
 / 57 
Figure 35  MAKING IT HAPPEN  
Funding the response  
Tackling the climate emergency will require significant investment at 
all levels of society. Dorset Council alone will need to invest many mil-
lions of pounds (over £100m) over the next 20 - 30 years just to be-
come a Carbon Neutral Council. Many measures will have a financial 
return on investment, but many may not. However, many will have 
wider health and economic benefits which can be realised. As further 
work is done to draw up detailed implementation plans for our build-
ings, vehicles, and energy infrastructure, we will need to develop a 
detailed financial strategy. It is a challenging, financial time for us all, 
especially Local Authorities.  
 
 
Wider action across the County is likely to require several billion 
pounds of investment from the government, organisations, and indi-
viduals. It is anticipated that further funding and incentives will be 
forthcoming from central government to support the shift to a low -
carbon future.  
/ 58  
We will work with partners and lobby government to seek additional 
support and external funding and to maximise opportunities for exter-
nal funding from government and others, making sure Dorset gets its 
fair share. This is in addition to securing innovative financial arrange-
ments for climate change projects and programmes and giving signifi-
cant weight to climate change in the procurement process.  
 
 
Engagement & communications  
We all need to take action to address the climate emergency and sup-
port the transition to a low -carbon future. Many organisations and indi-
viduals in Dorset are already actively involved in addressing the cli-
mate emergency. With the highest proportion of town and parish 
councils in the UK declaring a climate emergency, we know there are 
many knowledgeable individuals and organisations in Dorset, with 
good practice examples that others can follow.  
Through our initial call for ideas, Dorset residents told us they wanted 
Dorset Council to help with understanding climate change and the 
steps that can be taken to tackle it. The key audiences for this support 
identified as residents, businesses, farms, and schools. Our staff are 
also key to our success and have told us they wish to be more in-
volved.  
We already undertake many awareness and behaviour change activi-
ties in areas related to tackling carbon emissions and improving ecolo-
gy, such as active travel, household waste, and school recycling. In 
order to tackle this emergency head on, we need to put  the climate at  We will develop a finance strategy to enable us to deliver this cli-
mate emergency response by identifying and implementing ways for 
our finance department to actively support climate change action. 
This includes establishing invest -to-save schemes, such as our 
transformation fund, capital receipts through asset rationalisation, 
and building into our capital programme. We will also explore options 
to raise additional funds, such as through borrowing or council tax.  MAKING IT HAPPEN  
the forefront of our communications. We will do this by:  
Developing a comprehensive communications strategy for our ap-
proach to the climate and ecological emergency. This strategy will 
draw upon a variety of media and approaches to deliver key messag-
es on climate change issues and help drive change in Dorset, with a 
focus on raising awareness, supporting community action, and engag-
ing stakeholders in the decision -making.  
Some of the key actions we will take are -  
 
RAISING AWARENESS We will look to provide more ac-
cessible and digestible information on climate change and ecology 
and the actions we can all take through a range of channels. These 
will include upgrading our climate change website, developing an 
online information hub for sharing information, and best practice. This 
is as well as directing information to residents through Council litera-
ture and encouraging an open and ongoing dialogue between the 
Council and Dorset residents.  
We will improve the awareness, engagement, and knowledge of our 
staff and service providers through staff awareness campaigns, with a 
focus on how employees can reduce their carbon emissions. This is in 
addition to increasing their climate resilience in the workplace and at 
home and integrating key climate change messages into induction 
programmes. Furthermore, we will organise targeted briefings and 
training sessions for officers, members, and decision makers on the 
benefits and opportunities of tackling climate change, highlighting this 
contribution to other Council priorities. We will also establish an inter-
nal climate change champions programme.   
SUPPORTING COMMUNITY ACTION We will sup-
port Town and Parish Councils to develop and implement their organi-
sation and area wide climate action plans. This is as well as helping 
them engage with residents to encourage community action and drive 
change at a grassroots community level.  
We will help to facilitate and support new and existing community -led 
projects and community organisations active in this area. Further-
more, we will work with these groups to signpost and communicate 
shared messages.  
 
ENGAGEMENT WITH KEY STAKEHOLDERS 
We will consult with residents and organisations on this strategy and 
plans as they develop, using existing and new consultation processes.  
We will build support from stakeholders and the wider public by in-
forming and educating on the benefits and opportunities of acting on 
climate change and creating, maintaining, and developing partnership 
working on all aspects of climate change action. We will seek to de-
velop a Dorset Climate Emergency partnership group.  
We will facilitate the development of a Dorset -wide partnership with 
other key public, private, and third sector partners in order to develop 
a partnership approach to driving forward some of the fundamental 
changes that will be required to deliver a carbon neutral county.  
/ 59 MAKING IT HAPPEN  
Monitoring and progress reporting  
 
To ensure we are on track to meet our targets and not exceed our 
carbon budgets, we need a robust baseline and regular progress 
monitoring of both carbon emissions and ecological indicators. Our 
current baseline is currently incomplete.  
/ 60 Figure 36    
We will develop a robust baseline for Council and County carbon 
emissions and ecology; developing in -house data collection systems 
to draw data from all the former Councils now forming Dorset Council.  
This is as well as considering wider emissions from Council activities 
(Scope 3) such as procurement.  
 
 
We will further explore the Dorset County footprint, beyond the data 
provided by Central Government, to provide a wider understanding of 
Dorset ’s emissions e.g. agriculture.  
This strategy sets out the key areas for action and will be supported 
by more detailed plans, which will develop over time. A separate de-
tailed action plan will be published, which will be a live document and 
updated as work develops in this area.  
 
We will monitor and report on actions and progress in achieving car-
bon reduction by producing an annual report of progress on climate 
change targets, budgets, and actions.  
View detailed MAKING IT HAPPEN action plan  YOUR IDEAS  
Call for Ideas  
In December 2019, we asked members of the public to submit ideas 
on how Dorset Council might be able to help tackle climate and ecolo-
gy concerns. The Call for Ideas was open to everyone through the 
Council ’s website and was promoted widely through the local media 
and the Council ’s social media channels.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Of the 783 ideas received in the Council ’s Call for Ideas, 32 were 
invited to present at one of the two Inquiry Day sessions which took 
place at South Walks House, Dorchester on Friday 21 February and 
Tuesday 3 March respectively.  
Key Findings  
When submitting ideas, individuals and organisations were asked to 
choose a category (Buildings, Natural Environment, Waste and Ener-
gy, Transport, Leadership and Influence).   
The most commonly selected was Transport, with 26% of all ideas 
submitted falling within this category. The category with the fewest 
submissions was leadership with just 8% of the ideas.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Transport & Travel... was the most common topic, with many 
people mentioning the need to develop Dorset ’s transport links, spe-
cifically calling for improvements to be made to the County ’s footpaths 
and cycleways, and investment in bus and rail services.   
An increase in EV charging points, and increased traffic control 
measures were also mentioned frequently. This is in addition to other 
common suggestions, including increasing park and ride schemes, 
introducing car -free days in towns, using parking charges to  
 
 / 61 Insert image  
Figure 37  Figure 38  YOUR IDEAS  
discourage unnecessary car journeys, and introducing no -idling 
zones.  
Renewable Energy Generation...  
107 of all the ideas submitted mentioned renewable energy genera-
tion. Ideas focusing on solar power in Dorset were the most common. 
Examples of these ideas include installing solar PV on the roofs of all 
Council owned buildings, the introduction of grant schemes to help 
residents install solar PV on domestic properties and incentivising so-
lar installation through reduced Business Rates.  
Other renewable technologies commonly mentioned were wind, tidal, 
heat-pumps, hydro, wave, anaerobic digestion, and multi -measure 
approaches, with several people calling for the Navitus Bay offshore 
wind farm plan to be re -visited.  Waste Services... Many of the ideas in this area focused on im-
proving the waste collection and recycling services in the County. This 
included people calling for an increase in recycling facilities, clearer 
instructions on what and how to recycle, and the adoption of a circular 
waste economy in Dorset.  
Other recurring themes included initiatives to reduce litter, the intro-
duction and enforcement of single -use-plastic policies, and waste heat 
schemes.  
Planning... This was the most com-
monly mentioned theme, with 151 
(19%) of all ideas focusing on plan-
ning considerations and restrictions. 
Within this theme, ideas centred 
around three main topics:  
 
Of these topics, the most commonly 
mentioned was imposing tighter re-
strictions on housing developers. 
These ideas ranged from making sure 
all new buildings are built with solar 
panels and EV charge points, to stop-
ping developers from felling mature trees with many between.  
 / 62 Tighter restrictions on developers  
Relaxation of planning restrictions 
for listed buildings  
Prioritisation of brownfield sites for 
development  Insert image  
Figure 39  
Figure 40  YOUR IDEAS  
Leading the way...  
A high proportion of the ideas submitted focused on the leadership 
role of the Council, and key changes it can make to its own operations 
and behaviours to set an example for the rest of the County. Recur-
ring themes under this heading included:  Communication and support... Many of the ideas called on 
the Council to provide more information and support on understand-
ing climate change and the steps that can be taken to tackle it. The 
key audiences for this support were identified as residents, business-
es, farms, and schools. Furthermore, ideas included the development 
of a support platform or hub, increased communication and educa-
tion, and the sharing of best practice.  
Support for community action was another recurring theme under this 
heading. Many people suggested that the Council should help facili-
tate and support new and existing community -led projects.  
Natural Environment... Tree planting schemes featured heavily 
in the ideas submitted, with many people wanting the Council to plant 
more trees and support others to do the same. People also suggested 
re-wilding schemes that could be introduced in the County and the 
need for this approach to be reflected in wider policy making and 
planning decisions.  People also asked for an increase in environmen-
tal protections, changes in greenspace management, and a reduction 
in the use of harmful pesticides and herbicides.  
Several people suggested adopting a less impactful approach to 
verge side management, something that Dorset Council pioneered.   
Barriers... The top three barriers to implementing ideas identified 
by people were:  
/ 63 Investment in electric or biofuel vehicles  
Following examples of others  
Implementing stricter laws  
Reducing the footprint of the Council ’s build-
ings 
Making changes to the Council ’s operations  
Working with partners  
Lobbying central government  
Developing and publishing plans  
Making changes to street lighting  
Divesting from fossil fuel investments  
Public consultation  
Monitoring, recording, and publishing data  
YOUR IDEAS  
Engaging with Dorset ’s Youth  
It was also key that we heard from Dorset ’s young people on the issue 
of Climate Change and what it meant to them. Representatives from 
schools across Dorset and Kingston Mauward College came to speak 
to the Council ’s EAP in December. They told us about their major con-
cerns of what climate change may mean to their futures and worries 
about the type of world they will be inheriting in years to come. They 
asked that we take action to reduce carbon emissions and encourage 
everyone in Dorset to take action.  
EAP members 
visited Damers 
school to learn 
about all their eco
-school initiatives 
already encour-
aging local busi-
nesses to act by 
removing single 
use plastics. They 
also presented their ideas at the Inquiry Day in March.  
Members of Dorset Youth Council also attended the Inquiry Day ses-
sion and updated on their actions to develop a climate pledge for Dor-
set and their work to encourage schools to take greater action. They 
also laid down a challenge to Councillors to reduce their personal car-
bon footprint in the #CouncillorZeroCarbonChallenge .  
We will make sure the youth view informs the development of our ac-
tion to tackle climate change in Dorset.  
/ 64 Figure 42  Using your ideas  
We have taken account of the key findings and recurring themes 
raised through our engagement with Dorset residents and have used 
these to help shape this strategy and the Council ’s approach to tack-
ling and mitigating climate change in Dorset. You will see this within 
the relevant areas for action section within this strategy, as well as in 
the more detailed supporting papers.  
As we move forward to develop more detailed plans for the delivery of 
the strategy, we will draw on the specific detail of the individual ideas 
submitted.  Figure 41  NEXT STEPS  
This strategy is a start at setting out the general direction of travel that 
is required within the County. It explains some of the key challenges 
that we all face in achieving a carbon -neutral Dorset and identifies 
some of the areas where Dorset Council will endeavour to take action. 
Achieving our goal will require a shared understanding of the issues 
and action, by not only the Council, but organisations and individuals 
across Dorset.  
Action has already started in several areas highlighted within this 
strategy and many initiatives are already in place to mitigate climate 
change, improve and protect ecology and make Dorset more resilient 
to climate change. It is clear however, that we need a massive step up 
in our actions.   
 
Consult with the public and wider stakeholders  
Our next key step in finalising this strategy is to consult the public and 
key stakeholders in order to gather your views on the approach set 
out in this document. This will largely take the form of a detailed ques-
tionnaire to find out if you think we have this strategy right, have iden-
tified the correct areas for action, or whether any points are missing or 
need further consideration. We intend to do this over the autumn to 
ensure your views are reflected in the final strategy and help inform 
our action plans.  Detailed action planning  
We will take a project management approach to the delivery of our 
Climate and Ecological Emergency response. The areas for action 
within this strategy will therefore be further developed into a detailed 
plan setting out clear actions to be undertaken by Dorset Council. We 
will use the ‘Areas for action ’ as a basis for this but will also draw upon 
the actions raised through our ‘Call for ideas ’. 
Our Action Plan will set out our objectives, specific detailed actions, 
who in Dorset Council will be responsible, timescales and perfor-
mance measures. We will also include details of other key partners 
required to help deliver these actions, the scale of potential carbon 
savings and the associated co -benefits (health, economy, ecology 
and resilience).  
/ 65 
It is our intention to finalise this strategy with detailed action plans for 
approval by the Council in the new year (2021).   NEXT STEPS  
/ 66 Ensuring we stay on track  
As noted in ‘Making it Happen ’ we will finalise our baseline and moni-
tor and report progress annually against our carbon budgets and eco-
logical indicators. These will be our headline indicators.  
We will also monitor and track progress against individual actions 
within our plan and report progress regularly to Dorset Council ’s Cabi-
net and senior management. Each year we will review and update our 
action plans and provide an annual report of progress. We will make 
sure this is widely promoted to residents and organisations in Dorset.     
Things will change. We will be heavily reliant on policy and 
financial support from the government as well as 
further technological advancements particularly 
in the field of hydrogen, battery storage and 
smart technologies. We will keep track of these 
rapidly changing developments and adjust our strat-
egy and action plans accordingly.  
We will regularly review our overall strategy and ap-
proach to ensure it is still relevant and up to date. At a 
minimum we will update our strategy and refocus as re-
quired every 5 years.  
REFERENCES  
Figure1: © Owen Vachell, Chapmans Pool, photograph, source Dorset AONB  
Figure 2: photograph, source Pixabay, https://pixabay.com/  
Figure 3: © Sedat Ozkanca, Garlic Wood —Near Milton Abbas, photograph, source 
Dorset AONB  
Figure 4: © Dave Penman / Moonfleet Photography, photograph, Source Dorset 
AONB  
Figure 5: Impact of Climate Change on Physical, Mental, and Community Health, 
table, source U.S. Global Change Research Program, 2016. The Impacts of Climate 
Change on Human Health in the United States: A Scientific Assessment  
Figure 6: © Dave Penman / Moonfleet Photography, Source Dorset AONB  
Figure 7: © Dave Penman / Moonfleet Photography, Source Dorset AONB  
Figure 8:  © Michael Brown, Flower Meadow at Durlston, photograph, source Dor-
set AONB  
Figure 9: Wellbeing map, Dorset AONB / Dorset Council  
Figure 10 Wellbeing diagram  
Figure 11: Accelerated modern human –induced species losses: Entering the sixth 
mass extinction Ceballos et al 2015, graph, source https://
advances.sciencemag.org/content/1/5/e1400253  (Science Advances, 19 Jun 2015: 
Vol. 1, no. 5),  
Figure 12: © Michael Brown, Coombe Heath, photograph, source Dorset AONB  
Figure 13: © Rosie Mathisen, Seatown - Golden Cap Estate, photograph, source 
Dorset AONB  
Figure 14: © Sian Lister, Totem, photograph, source Dorset AONB  
Figure 15: photograph, source Pixabay, https://pixabay.com/  
Figure 16: photograph, source Pixabay, https://pixabay.com/  
Figure 17: Table 3, Proportion of net greenhouse gas emissions in each end user 
sector, UK 2017, Final UK greenhouse gas emissions national statistics 1990 -2017 
Excel data tables.  
Figure 18: Proportion of net greenhouse gas emissions in each end user, table, 
source BIES  
Figure 19: NI 186 - Per capita CO2 emissions in the LA area, source https://
data.gov.uk/dataset/c0f70493 -dd62 -49a8 -8f27-befa1fa70aed/ni -186-per-capita -
co2-emissions -in-the-la-area  Figure 20: Dorset Council baseline emissions diagram, Dorset Council  
Figure 21: Emissions pathways, diagram, Dorset Council  
Figure 22: Emissions pathways, diagram, Dorset Council  
Figure 23: © Dave Penman / Moonfleet Photography, source Dorset AONB  
Figure 24: Solar PV installation at Cerne Abbas Village Hall, source Low Carbon 
Dorset  
Figure 25: Clean Earth Energy, Dorset PV installation, photograph, source Low Car-
bon Dorset  
Figure 26: © Nick Bowring, Riversmeet, photograph, source Low Carbon Dorset  
Figure 27 and 28: photograph, source Dorset Food & Drink  
Figure 29: Dorset Innovation Park, photograph, source Dorset Council  
Figure 30: Dorset waste services, photograph, source Dorset Council  
Figure 31: © Nick Bowring, Riversmeet aerated shower heads, photograph, source 
Low Carbon Dorset  
Figure 32: © Rosie Mathisen, The Knowle - Looking towards Puncknowle, photo-
graph, source Dorset AONB  
Figure 33: © Kevin Freeman, Hambledon Hill, photograph, source Dorset AONB  
Figure 34: photograph, source Pixabay, https://pixabay.com/  
Figure 35: Corporate Priorities, diagram, source Dorset Council  
Figure 36: photograph, source Pixabay, https://pixabay.com/  
Figure 37: Climate Emergency Inquiry Day, photograph, source Dorset Council  
Figure 38: Call for Ideas Key Theme Breakdown, diagram, source Dorset Council  
Figure 39: Bournemouth University Solar PV installation, photograph, source Low 
Carbon Dorset  
Figure 40: Solar panels on roof, photograph, source Pixabay  
Figure 41: Damers ’ Eco Crew presenting at Climate Emergency Inquiry Day, source 
Dorset Council  
Figure 42:  Burning ideas, source Dorset Council  
Figure 43: © Owen Vatchell, White Knothe, photograph, source Dorset AONB  
/ 67 REFERENCES  
Further references:  
Ceballos et al: Accelerated modern human –induced species losses: Entering the 
sixth mass extinction  (Science Advances, 19 Jun 2015: Vol. 1, no. 5)  
Gilburn, A.S. et al (2015). Are neonicotinoid insecticides driving declines of wide-
spread butterflies?  PeerJ 3:e1402  
RSPB The State of Nature UK Report 2016   
Newton, A.C., Watson, S.C.L., Evans, P., Ridding, L., McCracken, M., Anger -Kraavi, 
A., and Bullock, J. (2019). Trends in natural capital, ecosystem services and eco-
nomic development in Dorset.  Bournemouth University  
2006 Dorset Environmental Record Centre analysis for Pastures New, a project led 
by Dorset AONB Partnership  
World Economic Forum 2010: Biodiversity and business risk  (authored by PWC) for 
the WEF Davos -Klosters Annual Meeting  
Grosdidier M., Scordia T., Ioos, R., Marçais B (2020) Landscape epidemiology of 
ash dieback , J. Ecol.   
Reading University Centre for Food Security newsletter   
Richardson, M., National Trust (2020) Noticing Nature . University of Derby  
Committee on Climate Change, Net Zero – The UK ’s contribution to stopping global 
warming, May 2019  
2017 UK GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS, FINAL FIGURES, ONS, 5 February 
2019  
NI 186 - Per capita CO2 emissions in the LA area  – MHCLG  
Video clip photo credits in order of appearance:  
Food & Drink video clip: images 1,7,8,9,10,11 © Lewis Webster source Dorset 
Council, image 2 © Rosie Mathisen source Dorset AONB, images 3,5,6 source Dor-
set Council, image 4 © Kevin Freeman source Dorset AONB, image 12 © Tony Gill 
source Dorset AONB, images 13,14,15 source Dorset Food & Drink  
Economy video clip: all images source Dorset Council  
Waste video clip: all images source Dorset Council  
Water video clip: image  7 source susdrain, all other images source Dorset Council  
/ 68 Natural Assets video clip: all images source Dorset Council  
Food & Drink video clip: images 1,7,8,9,10,11 © Lewis Webster source Dorset 
Council, image 2 © Rosie Mathisen source Dorset AONB, images 3,5,6 source Dor-
set Council, image 4 © Kevin Freeman source Dorset AONB, image 12 © Tony Gill 
source Dorset AONB, images 13,14,15 source Dorset Food & Drink  
 
 
 / 69 
Figure 43  