East Dunbartonshire  
Sustainability and Climate Change
Framework 2016 – 2021
Foreword
Sustainable Drainage System at Lumloch Way, Bishopbriggs It is over a decade since East Dunbartonshire Council launched its first Sustainable Development Strategy and in that 
time there has been considerable change.
The advent of the Council’s co-ordinated, proactive approach to sustainability in 2004 allowed us to build on existing 
good practice by planning, delivering and realising the benefits – to the organisation and to the communities – of various programmes of joined-up action on environmental, social and economic priorities.
The work that has been done to respond to climate change is particularly important, given the ongoing issues 
associated with global warming.
By delivering projects that conserve natural resources in ways that save money, promote health and protect 
communities from risks such as flooding, the Council has shown that environmental protection goes hand-in-hand with social and economic wellbeing.
A lot has been achieved, but our aim is to maintain and accelerate our contribution to delivering on our legal 
responsibilities and targets. In creating Public Bodies Duties, the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009 gave a clear message about the role of councils and public sector partners in addressing climate change and acting sustainably. This was echoed at the Paris Climate Change Conference in December 2015, where countries of the world united in an agreement to avoid dangerous climate change. Local government was highlighted as playing a leading role in driving transformation.
Transformation is an agenda at the centre of East Dunbartonshire Council’s approach to service delivery. Taking 
an approach which applies foresight, technology and service synergies to help create a smarter, more efficient organisation, the Sustainability and Climate Change Framework is an important opportunity for us to build on our reputation as a forward-thinking, creative and joined-up Council. 
The Framework takes a cross-Council view, identifying key service delivery areas and setting out commitments that 
will mean benefits for the organisation, the communities and the planet as a whole.
Partnership working is a fundamental part of  the Council’s approach and will be vital to the success of this Framework.  
The publication of this document is an opportunity to re-engage with established partners and to invite the involvement 
of new ones, and I hope that stakeholders will welcome the opportunity to contribute to this important agenda.
Thomas Glen
Depute Chief Executive - Place, Neighbourhood & Corporate Assets,East Dunbartonshire Council
Contents
Solar panels on The Leisuredrome, BishopbriggsGlossary 6
Ambition 8 
Why? 12
What? 16How? 22Where? 24Natural Environment 26
Sustainable Economic Growth 32
Mugdock Country Park 38
Procurement 44Built Environment 50
Community Capacity-Building 56
Education for Sustainable Development 60
Finance 64Sustainable Transport and Travel 68
Corporate Support Functions 74Glossary
6BID Business Improvement District
BIP Business Improvement Plan
BREEAM Building Research Establishment Environmental Assessment Method
CAMP Corporate Asset Management Plan
CEEF Central Energy Efficiency Fund
CLD Community Learning and Development
CMP Carbon Management Plan
CPD Continuing Professional Development
CPP Community Planning Partnership 
EDS Economic Development Strategy
EDVA East Dunbartonshire Voluntary Action
GDP Gross Domestic Product
GNS Green Network Strategy
GTCS General Teaching Council for Scotland
HGIOS How Good Is Our Service
HR  Human Resources
IPCC Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
LBAP Local Biodiversity Action Plan
LED Light-Emitting Diode
LDP Local Development Plan
LNCS Local Nature Conservation Site
LNR Local Nature Reserve
LOIP Local Outcome Improvement Plan
LTS Local Transport Strategy
NSEA Net Scottish Emissions Account
OSS Open Space Strategy
PDF Policy Development Framework
PMO Programme Management Office
PPS Plans, Policies & Strategies
RPP2 The Scottish Government’s Second Report on Proposals and Policies (RPP2)
SCCF Sustainability and Climate Change Framework
SEPA Scottish Environment Protection Agency
SME Small and Medium-Sized Enterprise
SNH Scottish Natural Heritage
SPP Scottish Planning Policy
SPT Strathclyde Passenger Transport
SSSI Site of Special Scientific Interest
STAG Scottish Transport Appraisal Guidance
SuDS Sustainable Drainage Systems
UNEP United Nations Environment Programme
WOSDEC West of Scotland Development Education Centre
WWF World Wildlife Fund for Nature
78AmbitionOur Ambition 
By 2020, East Dunbartonshire Council will demonstrate sustainability by delivering services in a 
way that protects and enhances the local and global natural environment while meeting social and economic needs, especially where those needs are greatest. By recognising and fostering the natural links between environmental, social and economic agendas, the Council will demonstrate forward-thinking, creative and joined-up ways of working which show that being greener is compatible with, and can often enhance, the achievement of corporate and community benefits.
9The work of the Council and its partners in the Community Planning Partnership (CPP) is guided by the vision set out in our Local Outcome Improvement Plan (LOIP):
“Working together to achieve the best with the people of East Dunbartonshire”
Sustainable development, or ‘sustainability’, supports this vision and the LOIP 2016-2019 sets out the CPP’s 
commitment “to ensuring that our actions today do not limit our quality of life in the future. This includes a 
commitment to climate change and sustainability issues and also to ensure that the outcomes of our actions and 
activities are considered in terms of social, economic and environmental sustainability.” Sustainability also supports the 
Council’s Transformation agenda.
Day-to-day life often involves using goods and services that bring benefits on one hand but can result in disadvantages, 
or costs, on the other hand; these costs can be social, economic or environmental in nature and are often manifold, 
creating multiple disadvantages for the environment, society and the economy. Climate change is a good example of 
this:
Focus on Climate Change
Fossil fuels provide us with a valuable energy source but their extraction and use creates environmental, social 
and economic problems, not just in distant areas but on our own doorstep. Various issues go hand-in-hand with climate change, including: loss of biodiversity; extreme weather events including increased flood risk and drought; rising insurance premiums; and the cost of disruption to business and agriculture.
Sustainability is about finding ways of meeting our needs while minimising negative impacts environmentally, socially and economically; put simply, it is about living our lives in a way that looks after places, people and pockets – ‘one planet living’. In other words, working together to achieve the best. 10‘Ecological footprint’ 1 research indicates that Scotland is living a ‘three-planet’ lifestyle, i.e. we are using resources at a 
rate three times higher than our planet can accommodate and that this ecological debt is increasing year-on-year. Living 
beyond the means of the planet is bad for the environment, for the economy and for society; it cannot be sustained. Globally, the impacts of degradation of natural resources can be seen in everything from species loss and extinction, to climate change, pollution, deforestation, desertification and over-fishing. In the UK we are now experiencing the disruptive effects of climate change on a regular basis, particularly through increased flood and storm events, and we continue to experience continued biodiversity decline. The costs of these impacts are considerable and increasing. They include the cost to public authorities of damage to infrastructure and resulting pressure on service delivery; to householders and the insurance industry of flood and storm damage to property; to business as a result of impacts 
on premises and transport networks; and to agriculture, which must cope with crop damage as a result of flood and 
drought and the reducing abundance of pollinator species such as bees. The impacts of environmental degradation and 
climate change are most keenly felt by those who are already suffering disadvantage, at both a global and local level; 
for example, the impact of flooding on those who cannot afford home insurance can be devastating and can lead to a significant increase in inequality and disadvantage. As the effects of climate change increase, the interactions between 
environmental change and its social and economic effects will become a more pressing policy consideration and one 
which demands new and innovative solutions.
This Sustainability and Climate Change Framework (SCCF) sets the context for a strategic, cross-Council approach 
to sustainability from 2016-2021, bringing key stakeholders together to agree on a set of actions that will fulfil our 
sustainability ambition and help drive forward the Council and CPP’s commitment to supporting improved quality of life 
at a time of accelerating environmental change. Given the relative strength of social and economic agendas elsewhere 
in the Council, this Framework focuses primarily on environmental concerns; however, this is done in a way that 
co-ordinates with and supports social and economic agendas wherever possible, and in the knowledge that in many cases, environmental protection automatically creates social and economic benefits with no additional intervention.
There are two key ways in which the environmental agenda can deliver social and economic benefits:
• Mutually-beneficial relationships exist naturally. Protecting the environment automatically generates   
 social and economic benefits, e.g. by creating healthier, safer and more pleasant surroundings and through  
 saving money by encouraging efficient resource use and avoiding the need for clean-up costs.
 > E.g. flood protection – The Colquhoun Park Flood Alleviation Scheme in Bearsden, East Dunbartonshire,  
  is a good showcase of the intrinsic relationships between environmental, social and economic benefits:  
  habitat protection and enhancement was undertaken to provide water attenuation, protect homes, offer  
  opportunities for exercise and recreation and improve the potential of the area for inward investment.  
  In protecting properties from flooding, it will also save future costs.
• There are opportunities for new links to be made. Protecting the environment involves finding new ways  
 to provide goods and services, and this creates an opportunity to incorporate social and economic benefits  
 by ensuring that ventures are developed in ways that meet the priorities of the communities they serve and  
 involve, especially those most in need, thereby ensuring that they are inclusive and successful enterprises.
 > E.g. Silver Birch (Scotland) Ltd, located near Kirkintilloch, recycles spent mushroom compost and makes  
  the final product available to the wider community as a nutrient-rich soil improver, providing work  
  experience and skill development to people with learning disabilities. 
1 ‘Ecological footprint analysis’ is a method, devised in 1992 by Dr William Rees and Mathis Wackernagel at the University of British Columbia,  
 which measures the impact of human activities in terms of the area of biologically productive land and water required to produce the goods  
 consumed and to assimilate the wastes generated; in other words, it is a measure of human demand on the earth’s ecosystems. More simply,  
 it is the amount of the environment necessary to produce the goods and services necessary to support a particular lifestyle.11 Whitefield Pond, Lennoxtown12Why? 
Flooded car park at Tom Johnston House, July 2002Protecting the environment is important in its own right and also contributes positively to society and the economy; 
this is a common-sense and efficient approach to service delivery. In addition to the advantages of acting sustainably and minimising our contribution to climate change as explained above, there is a requirement to ensure that the Council is operating in a sustainable way to meet a range of statutory duties, economic incentives, policy directions and public demands. The Local Government in Scotland Act 2003 created a driver for sustainability in Scotland, assigning local authorities a statutory duty of Best Value which requires that the Council demonstrates a contribution 
to sustainable development. The Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009 builds on this by setting Public Bodies Duties 
relating specifically to climate change and also including a requirement to act sustainably; public bodies are now 
required to report to the Scottish Government on action being taken to comply with this duty. The Procurement Reform (Scotland) Act 2014 introduced further requirements, creating a new ‘Sustainable Procurement Duty’ for public bodies. Such measures are underpinned by a range of global agreements, originating from the landmark Rio Earth 
Summit in 1992.
The warning that mis-using the earth’s finite resources cannot continue in the long-term – i.e. that it is not sustainable - 
accords with basic scientific principles. Influential texts such as The Limits to Growth (Meadows et al, 1972) warn that development that does not take account of environmental limits will lead to collapse. Recent research indicates that 
such predictions are accurate; the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) Decoupling Report
2, for example, 
notes that worldwide natural resource consumption is steeply on the rise and is still a reliable companion of economic 
prosperity and stresses that, while economic growth is important, it must be separated from unsustainable resource consumption, noting that inefficient resource management mines the very assets that underpin livelihoods and 
economic opportunities. The report argues that technological and systematic innovation offer historic opportunities for 
this to occur. 
Climate change, a particularly urgent issue within the wider sustainability agenda, illustrates the social and economic 
risks of failing to protect the environment. It is commonly regarded that a rise in average global temperature of more than 2°C would have catastrophic and irreversible impacts and data, such as that presented in the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change’s Assessment Reports
3, suggests that an increase of 1°C is already being reached. Findings 
from WWF’s Living Planet Report4 – the world’s leading, science-based analysis on the health of the planet and the 
impact of human activity – are consistent with this trend, recording stark declines in populations of mammals, birds, reptiles, amphibians and fish.
The international political response to climate change, which began at the Rio Earth Summit in 1992, entered a new 
phase at the UN Climate Change Conference in Paris in December 2015, where countries of the world united in an agreement to “hold the increase in the global average temperature to well below 2°C above pre-industrial levels and to pursue efforts to limit the temperature increase to 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels”. Each country will submit a pledge, or ‘nationally determined contribution’, every five years, with each containing more progressive targets than the last.
13
2 UNEP’s ‘Decoupling Natural Resource Use and Environmental Impacts from Economic Growth’ report, 2011 
 www.unep.org/resourcepanel/decoupling/files/pdf/Decoupling_Report_English.pdf 
3 www.ipcc.ch/publications_and_data/publications_and_data_reports.shtml#1 
4 wwf.panda.org/about_our_earth/all_publications/living_planet_report “Protecting the environment is important in its own right and also contributes positively to society and the economy.”14Achieving the necessary reduction in unsustainable activities is challenging. However, the Council is already challenged 
with the need to deliver transformational change, and sustainability is synonymous with this. The Transformation agenda, stimulated by the Council’s Strategic Planning and Performance Framework, emphasises the need for the Council to apply technology and foresight to become a smarter, forward-thinking organisation where efficiencies are maximised (e.g. by installing energy-efficient lighting and by adopting video technology to reduce the need to travel to meetings) and future costs are avoided with early, preventative spend; as the following sections will show, the sustainability agenda can help deliver on these ambitions. Rather than viewing it as an additional and unachievable burden, sustainability can be used as a framework not only to support the objectives of the LOIP but to deliver change that works for the whole organisation, in both the short- and longer-term. 
14 
Key
 Greenhouse gases embedded in imported good services
 Greenhouse gases from UK produced goods and services consumed by Scottish residents
 Greenhouse gases directly produced by Scottish residents
 TotalValue in millions tonnes carbon dioxide equivalent (MtCO 2e)38Meeting this challenge will require a step change, and East Dunbartonshire Council has an important role to play 
in this effort. The Council is already delivering in many ways, including via our Carbon Management Plan (CMP), which provides a policy basis for actions to reduce corporate emissions; while significant emission reductions have already been achieved, ambition must be stepped up to maintain and accelerate our contribution to delivering on climate change targets and the Council’s own Transformation agenda. As part of this, we must recognise and take responsibility for the negative impacts of our activities, even when they are not visible; this includes looking beyond the carbon released directly from within our boundaries and being accountable for emissions that occur further afield as a result of our increasing rates of consumption, for example through the consumption of goods in the Far East and the effects of their transportation to Scotland. The Net Scottish Emissions Account (NSEA), against which the achievement 
of Scotland’s greenhouse gas emissions targets is measured, focuses on carbon emitted from within Scotland’s 
boundaries (‘territorial’, or ‘production-based’ emissions) and shows a decrease over time; however, the ‘consumption-
based’ statistics released alongside these – required by the Climate Change (Scotland) Act – capture a fuller picture 
in which emissions are shown to be rising during periods that are recorded under NSEA data as having decreasing emissions:
100
806040200
1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012
Figure 1 – Scotland’s carbon footprint (greenhouse gas emissions on a consumption basis) 1998-2012 (Source: Key Scottish Environment Statistics 2015)1516What?The SCCF is intended as a foundation for considering how Council policies, programmes, plans and strategies can 
contribute to the delivery of the Council’s main sustainability priorities, which are set out below. Detailed actions 
to support these priorities will be set out in the forthcoming Dynamic Action Plan, which is discussed later in this document.
As a starting point, a series of basic principles, or ‘building blocks’, have been identified and form the Framework’s  
key objectives:  
Environmental  
Zero Carbon: Reducing Carbon Emissions 
Use of fossil fuels releases carbon, forming a layer which traps heat and contributes to temperature rises with 
consequent changes in weather patterns, creating challenges for the survival and wellbeing of species. To mitigate 
climate change, carbon reduction will be pursued by applying the energy hierarchy 5, especially in relation to buildings 
and transport. Efficient use of water resources will also be encouraged within Council-owned operations and in the wider community, to save carbon. Reduction of landfill and protection of the natural environment will also be 
recognised for their role in reducing carbon emissions. 
Maximising Resilience to the Impacts of Climate Change 
The delayed effect of carbon emissions on the climate means that, even if we reduce future emissions, changes in 
weather patterns are expected to increase due to carbon that has been released in the past, creating a need to adapt to inevitable climate change. Work will be undertaken to better understand the likely impacts, on service providers and users and on the wider community, arising from changes in weather patterns, and action will be taken to reduce risk and increase resilience to the anticipated future effects of climate change. Prioritisation of action will be based on contexts where service users are most vulnerable and contexts where there is a direct link to existing organisational priorities, including biodiversity action planning, health promotion and flood risk management. 
Zero Waste: Reducing Material Use and Waste Generation 
The environment is adversely affected when materials are extracted and returned at the end of their lives; our patterns 
of material use and waste generation often exceed the capacity of natural cycles to accommodate them, causing habitat loss, threats to biodiversity, pollution, and waste of valuable and finite resources. The Council will stimulate a reduction in the amount of materials being used and disposed of by supporting the ‘zero waste Scotland’ agenda and the principles of the waste hierarchy
6 by encouraging, in order: minimisation of unnecessary material use; re-using 
resources where possible; and recycling materials that cannot be re-used. The need to dispose of waste to landfill or incinerate it should be minimised and waste sent to landfill is subject to landfill tax.
Reversing Biodiversity Decline 
Biodiversity encompasses all living things; a biologically diverse environment is important in its own right and offers  
far-reaching benefits to society and the economy. Society has a responsibility to protect biodiversity from the increasing rate of loss that is occurring globally due to human activity. East Dunbartonshire has a rich and varied biodiversity, and the Council will protect and enhance the local natural environment to help to maximise the variety of native species and habitats in East Dunbartonshire, especially those identified as priorities in the East Dunbartonshire 
Local Biodiversity Action Plan (LBAP).
Sustainable Materials 
In addition to the amount (quantity) of resources we use, the type (quality) is an important consideration. Technological 
advances have produced substances which do not break down naturally when disposed of into land, air or the water system, and their resultant build-up disrupts ecosystems. The Council will seek to use materials that minimise environmental harm, including consideration of embodied energy and chemicals known to be harmful, especially in the 
construction and refurbishment of buildings. We will also address the legacy of industrial, commercial and agricultural 
contamination in our area by encouraging, and where necessary enforcing, remediation of affected land. 
17 5 The energy hierarchy is a classification of energy options, prioritised to assist progress towards a more sustainable energy system. The highest  
 priorities are given to prevention of unnecessary energy usage through eliminating waste and improving efficiency; the sustainable production  
 of energy resources is the next priority. The concept of the Energy Hierarchy is explained in detail in the SEPA Energy Position Statement:  
 www.sepa.org.uk/media/59374/sepa_energy_position_statement.pdf (see page 9)
6 Section 34 of the Environmental Protection Act 1990 establishes a statutory duty on everyone who produces, keeps or manages controlled  
 waste (with the exception of occupiers of domestic properties) to take all reasonable measures to apply the waste hierarchy and take all  
 reasonable steps to ensure waste is managed in a way that promotes high quality recycling. The Waste Hierarchy is set out in Article 4(1)  
 of the Waste Directive.18Social  
Maximising Opportunities to Promote Health and Wellbeing 
Reducing health inequalities and increasing physical and mental wellbeing are key priorities in the LOIP , as is 
the related aim of promoting safety. Health and wellbeing are influenced by many factors, from basic physical requirements to higher-level needs such as culture and recreation. The Council will continue to promote health and wellbeing within the workforce and in the wider community and will do this in a way that is joined-up with environmental objectives including active travel, provision of high quality greenspace and offender rehabilitation programmes that protect and enhance the environment. 
Supporting Fairness and Reducing Inequality Locally and Globally 
Equality of opportunity to access jobs, training and services is an important aspect of quality of life. The SCCF supports 
the strategic direction and long-term priority of the LOIP , which is “to reduce inequality between the most and least deprived communities”. Factors such as disability, ethnic origin, age, gender and geographical location can limit a person’s ability to realise their potential and fully contribute to society, and undermine opportunities to meet their own needs. Through the SCCF , the Council will work to pursue equality of opportunity in ways that also promote environmental benefits, including addressing fuel poverty and stimulating green jobs and skill development. Global equalities will also be promoted, recognising the impact that we have on the wider world, especially the poorest countries, and ensuring that those we depend on are given a fair deal in return for the goods and services they provide us with. 
Promoting Community Empowerment 
To ensure that goods and services are tailored to the needs of the communities they are serving, and to engender  
a sense of control and involvement, it is important to engage communities in the design and delivery of services.  The Council will work with other public sector partners and directly with community groups to deliver on the Change Community Empowerment (Scotland) Act 2015 to strengthen local democracy by ensuring, as far as possible, that decisions on service priorities and design are shaped by the individuals and communities receiving the services. 
18
19These objectives do not always exist in perfect harmony, and it is important to ensure that progress on one front 
does not compromise progress on others. However, there is generally a strong interdependence between all 
elements. It was stated earlier that the broad environmental, social and economic interests that make up our 
ambition are interdependent, and this can be seen at the level of the elements that underpin it, which are linked by 
a web of connections too complex and dynamic to fully capture in print. As such, addressing one objective can often 
automatically contribute to the delivery of others. 
While the complexity and dynamic nature of these connections makes it impossible to exhaustively describe them, 
various examples can be provided:
• Reducing material use and waste generation contributes to carbon reduction because material resource efficiency  
 involves energy efficiency, and because diverting organic materials away from landfill avoids methane being  
 produced during decomposition. It also contributes to the achievement of sustainable substances, as reducing the  
 amount of materials used and waste generated will reduce the amount of inorganic, non-biodegradable substances.
 
• Reversing biodiversity decline can contribute to carbon reduction by increasing absorption of CO2 and also supports  
 climate change adaptation by providing water attenuation and protection from extreme weather events; thriving  
 ecosystems also promote physical and mental health, and provide services fundamental to the economy.
• Maximising resilience to the impacts of climate change can: contribute to reducing inequality by addressing flood  
 disadvantage; enhance greenspace; protect the function of the local economy; and help to prevent the potential  
 spread of harmful substances from contaminated land through ecosystems as a result of flooding.
The interdependence between these elements highlights the importance of not viewing them as discrete areas; while 
it is useful to break the web of connections down into smaller chunks, and while it is argued that the breakdown 
presented here is a logical way of doing so, there is no definitive, clear-cut method.
In many cases, objectives can be grouped together in wider concepts such as air quality, which is influenced by carbon 
emissions and the presence of synthetic substances e.g. from vehicle fumes. In some cases, interplay can exist 
between various objectives, effectively creating an over-arching objective. Active travel is another good example – 
travel based on physical activity rather than motorised, carbon-dependent means, is an agenda where various benefits 
are delivered in a mutually-supportive way: carbon emissions are reduced, more affordable means of travel are made 
available, health and wellbeing are promoted and the improvements to the local path network encourage leisure 
pursuits and improve access to local businesses. If path networks are created in a way that protects and enhances 
greenspaces and priority habitats and species, then biodiversity will also be promoted which will, in turn, help to purify 
the air, thus promoting health, and will also help to absorb carbon emissions and provide buffering and attenuation of 
extreme weather, thus contributing to climate change mitigation and adaptation.
Economic 
Supporting local businesses
The Council will encourage the start-up and retention of successful local businesses through supportive policies, 
provision of infrastructure and sound purchasing decisions. As part of the Council’s commitment to economic development, various services are provided to support new and existing local businesses. There is scope to further improve these services to better link them to environmental and social goals; the Council will encourage socially-responsible business models and adoption of circular economy principles across the business community and will lead by example by demonstrating efficiency in its day-to-day operations.2020Figure 2 – The multiple, inter-related benefits of active travelActive travelCarbon reduction
It is these interdependencies and synergies that allow, and in fact necessitate, the joined-up vision set out above. 
The SCCF will seek to achieve transformational change by embracing and fully realising these natural connections, 
and the forthcoming sections of the document set out how and where this will be done. The forthcoming sections also identify synergies between Council services to facilitate joint working – in the same way that elements of the natural world are linked together, different sections of an organisation often have mutual interests, and the SCCF will encourage these links to be realised.
In taking this holistic approach, the Framework will not only ensure that “East Dunbartonshire is a safe and sustainable 
environment in which to live, work and visit” but will deliver across all LOIP outcomes in a joined-up way. Supporting fairness and  
reducing inequality
Promoting health  
and wellbeing
Supporting culture,  
recreation and sport
Supporting local  
businessessPromoting  
biodiversity
Climate change  
adaptation21 John Muir Way at Barhill22How?
Waste collection in East DunbartonshireThe key objectives of this Framework provide the context for a range of high level aspirations - ‘strategic 
commitments’ - which are described in each of the following themed sections to identify directions of travel for improving the Council’s sustainability performance. 
The success of this Framework depends on a set of universal principles which underpin the achievement of change:
• Taking an evidence-based approach
• Educating and empowering
• Responding to statutory requirements, and contributing to the development of new statutory duties and  
 economic incentives
• Fully integrating sustainability into the strategies and policies that guide our activities
• Ensuring the presence of practical support services (e.g. recycling collections)
• Creating sound monitoring and reporting systems
• Sharing best practice
These principles will be used to guide the strategic commitments set out in the following sections. They will also be 
used to guide action-planning in each context; this will be done via a Dynamic Action Plan, which will set out a series 
of actions to deliver on these aspirations and which will be prepared following the publication of this Framework.  
The Dynamic Action Plan will also set targets and identify responsibilities for delivery. The Dynamic Action Plan will serve as a live record that is updated frequently to reflect progress and changing duties and obligations in relation to sustainability and climate change and can also act as the basis for reporting on progress in delivering our sustainability and climate change priorities; it will be formally reviewed on an annual basis.
In line with the commitment to taking an evidence-based approach, data is provided, where available, in the themed 
sections in order to provide detailed, objective information on performance, helping to establish a baseline, to target future actions and to establish an indicator set for monitoring progress. Where evidence is not available, the Council is committed to seeking further information in order to form as full an understanding as possible. Over the first year of the Framework, and alongside the preparation of a delivery action plan for the strategic commitments set out in this Framework – the ‘Dynamic Action Plan’ – we will explore appropriate methodologies to assist in measuring the delivery of our overall ambition and commitments, including the ‘One Planet Living’ approach co-ordinated by BioRegional and WWF
7. 
Delivery of the Framework and Action Plan will depend on partnership working between Council services, between the Council and its Community Planning Partners, and with external stakeholders. As stated earlier, there are many overlaps in terms of areas of interest; the SCCF will play a crucial role in realising these, aiding the achievement of sustainability and going beyond this to contribute significantly to the Council’s Transformation agenda by facilitating, and adding value to, efficient working practices. This collaboration will be pursued via a forward-thinking approach that recognises and looks beyond the limitations of traditional working groups and instead brings people together in flexible, innovative ways.
23
7 See www.oneplanetliving.com24Where?
Forth and Clyde CanalDelivering results on the ground involves looking at existing Council functions and identifying which goals and 
supporting actions are relevant in each context. There are certain areas of Council activity that offer particular opportunities for sustainability; for example, Corporate Asset Management covers a range of Council functions in which sustainability is particularly important. For each area, it is intended that the Sustainability Policy Team will work with the relevant officers and teams to identify existing good practice, highlight gaps (with particular reference to statutory obligations and opportunities for improved financial efficiency) and agree on ways in which sustainability can 
be further mainstreamed into everyday Council practices, ensuring the adoption of a consistent approach and set of 
principles in all we do. 
While the thematic areas of Council activity addressed in the following chapters are mainly based on service delivery 
structures, there are some areas where more than one service contributes; additionally, the thematic areas are not 
independent of each other; in many cases, the actions agreed under each heading will feed into other areas.
In each chapter, legislative and policy drivers with particular relevance to each thematic area will be highlighted, 
followed by background information and a summary of progress and achievements so far. Areas of future activity, and relevant partners, are then discussed; based on this, a series of strategic commitments is then set out for each 
thematic area. 
It should be noted that, in addition to those legislative and policy instruments particular to each thematic area, the 
Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009 and the Local Government in Scotland Act 2003 are relevant across all areas.
2526Natural EnvironmentThe natural environment encompasses all living and non-living things occurring naturally on earth, comprising a 
complex mix of materials and processes which provide the natural resources and support systems, or ‘ecosystem services’, which sustain all life on earth and on which our society and our economy depend.
Wider Context
A healthy natural environment is vital for the health and wellbeing of our society and economy. The fundamental contribution of the natural environment to everyday life can be summarised by the term ‘ecosystem services’, a concept long recognised by scientists which is gaining popular appeal. Ecosystem services can be categorised in three main ways: provision of products, e.g. food and fuel; regulation and maintenance of processes and systems e.g. climate, pollination and disease; and cultural services, e.g. tourism and spirituality. Recent research
9 focusing on 
the particular contribution of the natural environment to the economy estimates that 11% of total economic output in Scotland is dependent on the natural environment, supporting 14% of all full-time Scottish jobs.
Biodiversity, i.e. plants, animals and other living organisms, is a crucial component of the natural environment and is in 
decline globally at an increasing rate. While some human activity benefits biodiversity, many activities are contributing to its decline, resulting in irreversible losses. Recent research
10 indicates that between 1970 and 2013, 56% of UK 
species studied have declined and that the UK is among the most nature-depleted countries in the world.
The Council has a statutory duty to further the conservation of biodiversity through the Nature Conservation (Scotland) 
Act 2004, and to report on progress towards achieving this. To support the conservation of biodiversity, areas of land and water may be given special protection; various designations exist, including Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs), Local Nature Reserves (LNRs) and Local Nature Conservation Sites (LNCSs). In East Dunbartonshire, there are 3 LNRs and 6 SSSIs. There is also a considerable and growing number of LNCSs; the current figure stands at over 100 (including some Geodiversity LNCSs) and this is subject to increase, pending the results of a review.
In Scotland, peatland is a particularly significant aspect of the natural environment and East Dunbartonshire has 
a number of important lowland raised bog peatlands. These areas are biodiversity-rich, play an important role in hydrology and flood management, perform a valuable carbon storage function (helping to mitigate climate change), and provide crucial services to social and economic wellbeing. Scotland’s National Peatland Plan recognises the value of healthy peatlands and commits to improving degraded areas. Five of East Dunbartonshire’s LNCSs contain areas of lowland raised bog, which is given Annex 1 Priority Habitat Protection under the EU Habitats Directive. There are also areas of deep peat in the Campsie Fells, identified in Scottish Natural Heritage’s Carbon and Peatland 2016 Map
11. 
27
8 The Scottish Biodiversity Strategy is comprised of Scotland’s Biodiversity: It’s in Your Hands (2004) and 2020 Challenge for Scotland’s   
 Biodiversity (2013)
9  Scottish Natural Heritage’s ‘Valuing Our Environment’ Report www.snh.gov.uk/docs/B313698.pdf 
10 RSPB’s ‘State of Nature’ Report and ‘State of Nature Scotland’ reports, 2016 
 www.rspb.org.uk/our-work/conservation/centre-for-conservation-science/research/details.aspx?id=363867 
11  www.snh.gov.uk/planning-and-development/advice-for-planners-and-developers/soils-and-development/cpp/Key Drivers
• Wildlife and Natural Environment (Scotland) Act 2011
• Nature Conservation (Scotland) Act 2004
• Water Environment and Water Services (Scotland) Act 2003
• UK Habitats Regulations 1994
• Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981
• Town and Country Planning (Scotland) Act 1997
• Scottish Planning Policy and National Planning Framework 3
• Flood Risk Management (Scotland) Act 2009
• Clydeplan Strategic Development Plan 2017
• Scottish Biodiversity Strategy 2004, 20138
• SNH Natural Heritage Futures 201028While the Scottish Environment Protection Agency (SEPA) is Scotland’s principal environmental regulator, local 
authorities play an important role in protecting and enhancing the natural environment. Legislation including the Water 
Environment and Water Services (Scotland) Act 2003, the Town and Country Planning (Scotland) Act 1997 and the 
Flood Risk Management (Scotland) Act 2009 provide a statutory basis for local authorities to undertake a range of 
functions to protect and enhance the natural environment within their boundaries. 
As an organisation, East Dunbartonshire Council needs to demonstrate biodiversity delivery and to ensure that all its 
activities contribute to the statutory duty wherever possible. It also works with key partners to prepare and deliver the LBAP and to develop a clear vision for the green network within East Dunbartonshire. 
The land use planning system is a key means through which a Council can influence its local natural environment by 
ensuring that the need to further the conservation of biodiversity is reflected in development plans and development management decisions, and by seeking benefits for biodiversity from new developments, including the restoration of degraded habitats. The role of the land use planning system in protecting and enhancing biodiversity is reflected in Scottish Planning Policy (SPP).
The potential influence of the land use planning system on sustainability is well documented, with SPP 2014 setting 
sustainability as one of two principal policies. The particular relevance of land use to climate change mitigation and adaptation is highlighted in the Land Use Strategy for Scotland, which is currently being updated.
Progress and Achievements So Far
The Council produced its first Biodiversity Duty Delivery Report in 2015, covering the period January 2012-December 2014. This explains the steps the Council has taken as an organisation to contribute to the conservation of biodiversity in the area. The Report highlights the importance of partnership working and engagement in delivering the biodiversity agenda and sets out the considerable range of work undertaken by Council services to deliver the Biodiversity Duty; for example, the recent creation of a biodiversity-based flood mitigation scheme at Colquhoun Park in Bearsden illustrates how Council services can work in partnership to enhance the local natural environment in a way that delivers social and economic benefits by providing recreational opportunities and helping to protect local properties from flooding. 
The Council has also carried out significant work on East Dunbartonshire’s lowland raised bog; Green Stimulus Funding 
from the Scottish Government has been used to carry out peatland restoration on Low Moss (Bishopbriggs) and Lenzie Moss. Work has also been undertaken to support local food production, with an allotment site being established at Rosebank, Kirkintilloch and a further allotment project being progressed in the east of Milton of Campsie.
The practical delivery of biodiversity and greenspace work by the Council is undertaken via methods that are 
sympathetic to wider environmental concerns, for example: 
• 10% of Council-managed amenity grass is now under new management regimes which benefit biodiversity through  
 a combination of reduced cutting and wildflower and seed enhancement
• Native wildflower planting is being carried out in a number of locations
• Over 10 new wildlife ponds were created across East Dunbartonshire between 2012 and 2014
• An extensive programme of invasive non-native species removal is carried out
• Projects to improve woodland and woodland access have been delivered at 39 sites between 2012 and 2014 in  
 partnership with Forestry Commission Scotland
• Over 250 environmental education sessions were delivered to local schoolchildren between 2012 and 2014
• Peat-free compost from a local supplier is used, and no pesticides are employed. Green waste is also composted,  
 via Buchley Eco-Centre, and on-site re-use of soil and sand has been trialled in cemeteries. To prepare land for  
 meadow creation, turf-stripping and/or land scarification is carried out on a case-by-case basis instead of spraying,  
 which minimises chemical load. 
2829The East Dunbartonshire LBAP provides a strategic framework for preserving and enhancing local habitats and 
species in a way that also benefits society and the economy across East Dunbartonshire. The Open Space Strategy (OSS) supports this, promoting health and encouraging an appreciation of the natural world by ensuring that local communities have access to quality open space. Partnership working arrangements are key in achieving effective delivery; community groups such as Friends of Lenzie Moss and the Scottish Wildlife Trust play an important role, in line with the Council’s commitment to support community empowerment. (The Community Payback agenda also contributes; this is discussed in the Community Capacity-Building section).
The preservation and enhancement of greenspace and biodiversity is supported by policies within the emerging Local 
Development Plan (LDP), which has a commitment to sustainability at its core, including supporting regeneration and 
protection of the green belt, delivery of a high standard of green infrastructure and the green network, and protection 
and enhancement of landscape character and nature conservation. 
Future Actions
The Council’s Biodiversity Duty Delivery Report 2012-2014 identifies specific key areas of work for the 2015-2017 period to further support delivery of our statutory duties:
• Review and relaunch of the new LBAP , including re-engagement with the biodiversity partnership and working  
 towards the designation of new Local Nature Reserves at West Balgrochan Marsh, Balgrochan Marsh and  
 Millersneuk Wetland
• Production of a Green Network Strategy (GNS) to identify opportunities to strengthen the habitat network and link  
 to the LBAP and Council’s Active Travel Strategy
• Production of an Invasive Non-Native Species Policy
• Better mainstreaming of the Biodiversity Duty through the Council. 
A particular focus will be the commencement of initial peatland restoration work at High Moss (Bishopbriggs), an area 
of lowland raised bog, and potential damming on the slopes of the Campsies; restoration work at Lenzie Moss and Low Moss will continue, and feasibility studies will be carried out on the other two areas of protected lowland raised bog in East Dunbartonshire, at Gartshore and Badenheath. Restoration of fen peat areas and access improvements will be carried out at Millersneuk Marsh along with reed management and water vole habitat enhancements. To support and extend this work, the feasibility of producing a Peatland Action Plan will be considered; this could aid in identifying the presence of fen peat and blanket bog in East Dunbartonshire and could support the protection of peat soils in non-biodiversity-rich areas. This work will bring a wide range of benefits for the natural environment, including contributions to biodiversity and climate change adaptation. 
A variety of other actions will be delivered through the LBAP and GNS; these include: • Additional applications, for woodland sites, to the Forestry Commission Scotland’s ‘Woodland In and Around Towns’  
 programme
• Application to the Green Infrastructure Funding scheme for a large scale Green Network project, linked to improving  
 riparian corridors and River Basin Management objectives 
• Application to the Green Stimulus Peatland Action Fund for additional peatland restoration
The emerging GNS and updated LBAP will support these activities by identifying objectives and actions to conserve and enhance local ecosystems in a way that promotes wellbeing and enhances economic competitiveness. The LDP , and related emerging Planning Guidance on the Natural Environment and Supplementary Guidance on Green Infrastructure/Network, will also support these activities by increasing awareness of local habitats and species, the water environment and green infrastructure/green network and by encouraging developments that protect and enhance the local and nationally important natural and water environment and that deliver open space and green network opportunities to meet the needs of the development. 30To deliver on our duties under the Flood Risk Management (Scotland) Act 2009, the Council will produce a Flood 
Risk Management Plan, and it is intended that this will include natural flood alleviation measures, in turn including an 
increase in the number of Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS) in open spaces. This is supported by the Council’s 
involvement in the Clyde and Loch Lomond Joint Committee and the Metropolitan Glasgow Strategic Drainage 
Partnership.
To deliver on our responsibilities under the Community Empowerment (Scotland) Act 2015, we will also produce 
a Community Food Growing Strategy to stimulate the use of local land for food production that is led by, and that provides various benefits to, the local community. As part of this process, site investigation works and community consultation will be undertaken in relation to a proposed major allotment site at Milton of Campsie.
At a practical level, various measures will be taken in relation to the practical conservation work undertaken by 
Place, Neighbourhood & Corporate Assets, to ensure that the materials and methods being used are as natural and sustainable as possible – peat-free compost will be used systematically, and, when undertaking treatment of weeds and invasive species, chemical spraying will be only be done outwith children’s areas. The feasibility of in-house storage of green waste for re-use (e.g. as mulch) will also be investigated and work will be undertaken with factors and landowners to stimulate the use of play equipment made from sustainably-sourced wood, using the proposed Forest School site in Bearsden as a pilot. 
These commitments will be supported by the further development of working arrangements within and between 
relevant Council teams. Teams within Place, Neighbourhood & Corporate Assets will explore opportunities for more closely monitoring delivery through planning application decisions, will continue to identify further opportunities for undertaking practical conservation work via sustainable methods, and will work with Corporate Procurement to enable the formalising of procurement procedures that support sustainable specifications for habitat and greenspace management and maintenance.
30Figure 3 – Indication of service synergies and partnership working for Natural EnvironmentPartnerships:Clyde & Loch LommondJoint Committee;Metropolitian GlasgowStrategic DrainagePartnership
Third sector:Community GroupsNational bodies:
SEPA; SNHCouncil functions:
Land Planning and 
Development; Civic Pride
Natural  
Environment31Strategic Commitments
In addition to continuing our good practice, and in line with our statutory responsibilities, we will: 
• Finalise and implement the GNS and updated LBAP for  
 East Dunbartonshire, and produce a Community Food Growing Strategy 
• Produce a Non-Native Species Policy
• Undertake peatland restoration and investigate the feasibility of producing a Peatland Action Plan for  
 East Dunbartonshire
• Use the LDP , and related Supplementary Guidance and Planning Guidance, to   
 increase awareness of local ecosystems and to encourage developments that protect and enhance the   
 environment and that deliver open space and green network opportunities
• Produce a Flood Risk Management Plan for East Dunbartonshire, support natural flood alleviation projects  
 and increase the number of Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS) in open space 
• Undertake environmentally-sensitive practical conservation and maintenance by avoiding peat-based  
 compost, investigating options for green waste re-use, stimulating use of play equipment from  
 sustainably-sourced wood and avoiding spraying of chemicals in children’s areas
• Work with key partners and funders to identify other possible opportunities to conserve biodiversity and  
 deliver high quality greenspace
Main objectives covered: 
All
32Sustainable Economic Growth
Milngavie Farmers' MarketSustainable economic growth is economic development that attempts to satisfy the needs of humans but in a manner 
that sustains natural resources and the environment for future generations.
Wider Context
Economic development has significant potential to contribute to sustainability and the mitigation of climate change; there are important opportunities to reduce environmental degradation and tackle inequality through introducing more efficient practices in existing organisations and encouraging the creation of new, small enterprises that enhance diversity in the business community and provide opportunities for community empowerment and delivery of ‘green’ goods and services. 
This is reflected at a national level, with a growing number of legislative and policy instruments encouraging the 
adoption of more sustainable business practices. The Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009 sets out ambitious targets for reduction of greenhouse gas emissions to which all sectors of society and economy are expected to contribute. The Scottish Government’s Energy Efficiency Action Plan, Conserve and Save
12, sets out the importance of energy 
efficiency for business and highlights the important role energy efficiency offers in the transition to a low-carbon economy. In 2010, the Scottish Government published its Low Carbon Economic Strategy for Scotland
13, which sets 
out a framework for the transition to a low-carbon economy with the aspiration that ‘by 2020, and certainly by 2050, Scotland will have a highly sustainable and prosperous economy where Scotland is a major player and beneficiary in the development of global low carbon markets’
14. Promotion of a low-carbon economy is essential to ensure that 
Scotland and East Dunbartonshire’s economy is resilient to unpredictable commodity and energy prices and reduces risk in terms of energy supply. Reduced reliance on fossil fuels brings benefits in terms of a positive contribution in meeting our greenhouse gas reduction targets and improving air quality. It also supports the Scottish Government’s target for sustainable economic growth.
The Scottish Government’s Low Carbon Economic Strategy highlights the links between zero waste, business advice 
and support, energy efficiency, skills development, regulation and sustainable procurement in supporting the transition to a low-carbon economy. 
At a UK level, the Climate Change Act 2008 established the world’s first legally-binding greenhouse gas emission 
reduction target – at least 80% (from the 1990 baseline) by 2050. As part of the UK Government’s strategy to support achievement of this target, incentives for public and private sector organisations to adopt more energy-efficient technologies are supported by the Carbon Reduction Commitment Energy Efficiency Scheme. This Scheme, and the EU Emissions Trading Scheme (for larger emitters), hold organisations financially accountable for carbon emissions.
The European Commission (EC) signalled a move towards the circular economy with the publication of its Circular 
Economy Package in December 2015. The circular economy agenda seeks to move production and consumption from the ‘take, make, use and throw away’ approach towards retention and re-use of precious resources and realisation of their full economic value. The circular economy goes beyond simply reducing waste and protecting the environment, towards a profound transformation in the way our entire economy works. The EC intends to: move towards alignment of structural funding programmes to support delivery of the principles of the circular economy; develop a range of incentives to support eco-design principles including durability, repairability and recyclability; support greater biodegradability of plastics; and encourage water re-use. This will be reinforced by tougher regulatory requirements on waste, including higher recycling targets and a binding target to reduce landfill to a maximum of 10% of all waste by 2030. There will also be promotion of economic instruments to discourage landfilling and economic incentives for producers to develop greener products for market through recovery and recycling schemes and incentives to promote re-use of goods. This movement was progressed at a national level in Scotland during 2016 with the publication of ‘Making Things Last – A Circular Economy Strategy for Scotland
15.
33Key Drivers
• Conserve and Save: Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Scotland 2010
• Low Carbon Economic Strategy for Scotland
• EC Circular Economy Package 2015
• Making Things Last: A Circular Economy Strategy for Scotland
12 Scottish Government, ‘Conserve and Save: Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Scotland (2010) www.gov.scot/Publications/2010/10/07142301/16 
13 Scottish Government, ‘Low Carbon Economic Strategy for Scotland’ (2010) www.gov.scot/resource/doc/331364/0107855.pdf 
14 Scottish Government, ‘Low Carbon Economic Strategy for Scotland’ (2010), p.6
15 ‘Making Things Last: A Circular Economy Strategy for Scotland’ www.gov.scot/Resource/0049/00494471.pdf34The circular economy agenda is expected to drive a significant move towards business practices with resource 
efficiency at their heart; in addition to projected environmental benefits including significant reduction in greenhouse 
gas emissions, it is anticipated that growth in the circular economy could create over 200,000 jobs in the UK and 
reduce unemployment by approximately 54,000 by 203016. Various other policy instruments mirror this ambition, 
including Scotland’s Economic Strategy, based on the Scottish Government’s central purpose of creating sustainable economic growth, and National Planning Framework 3, which provides spatial guidance to Scotland’s Economic Strategy and emphasises the importance of sustainable resource use.
Progress and Achievements So Far
The importance of sustainable economic growth is built into local policy. East Dunbartonshire’s LOIP includes a commitment to ensuring that actions are considered in terms of social, economic and environmental activity, and this is translated into a local outcome which states that “East Dunbartonshire is a safe and sustainable environment in which to live, work and visit”. The Council and Community Planning Partnership’s current Economic Development Strategy (2013) includes an action to increase business knowledge of sustainability. The emerging Economic Development Strategy (EDS) for 2016-2019 will take forward the LOIP ambition and recent EC and Government policy, providing a platform for sustainable economic growth in East Dunbartonshire. A review of national and regional policy to inform the development of the EDS has identified sustainability as a policy priority. The Proposed LDP supports this, citing sustainable economic growth as a principal policy. 
The Council has connections to the local business community via the Council’s Economic Development, Business 
Gateway and Land Planning functions and various measures have been established to promote and support sustainable business practices, at a strategic and practical level. 
Sustainable economic activity is also encouraged in Milngavie via the Milngavie Business Improvement District (BID) 
agenda; through this partnership, funding is raised for projects that enhance the attractiveness of the town centre, thus supporting a sustainable local shopping destination. The Milngavie BID Business Plan includes a commitment to zero waste principles. 
At a practical level, local businesses are given regular information about potential grant funding, including eco-related 
measures. Socially-sustainable business start-ups, and existing third sector organisations, are also supported by the Council’s Business and Tourism Team via a relationship with East Dunbartonshire Voluntary Action (EDVA).
Several members of East Dunbartonshire’s business community showcase the economic opportunities created by 
environmentally- and socially-sustainable practices:
• Caurnie Soaperie in Kirkintilloch produces natural, animal-free and palm oil-free skincare products using organic  
 herbs and essential oils; they have been awarded an Ethical Consumer ‘Best Buy’ Label and endeavour to support  
 fair trade
• Silver Birch (Scotland) Ltd in Milton of Campsie provides skill development and work-focused placements to  
 people with learning disabilities through social and therapeutic horticulture. As a charitable social enterprise, they 
 also produce and sell a wide range of sustainable gardening products such as mushroom compost, bark and plants.  
 Silver Birch is also East Dunbartonshire’s Fairtrade Flagship Employer.
• The Twechar Environmental Training Project provides certified training, work placements and volunteering  
 opportunities through commercial landscaping work including food growing initiatives and woodland walkway  
 creation 
• The Coach House in Balmore has been selling fairly traded, organic and locally-sourced products for over 30 years;  
 their pioneering approach to ethical trade has won international recognition
34
16 Scottish Government consultation, ‘Making Things Last’: www.gov.scot/Resource/0048/00483940.pdf 35Future Action
We will take strategic and practical measures to help existing businesses to be more sustainable, and to encourage the 
establishment of new sustainability-focused businesses like those showcased above.
At the strategic level, the EDS will set the framework for delivery of a low-carbon economy in East Dunbartonshire. 
The Strategy will be developed through the East Dunbartonshire Economic Partnership, which brings the Council together with Community Planning Partners, including business and agency partners, to develop a strategic approach to support sustainable economic growth and the delivery of the circular economy. In particular, the development of the EDS will seek to establish how the principles of the circular economy can benefit East Dunbartonshire’s economy through:
• Offering new commercial opportunities 
• Contributing to business growth and sustainability
• Generating new revenue opportunities
• Transforming business’s relationship with its customers
• Protecting the national and local economy against resource shortages and the rising cost of materials
The development of the EDS will investigate the potential for economic activity from sustainable tourism, from the 
green network and active travel agendas, and from biomass production and energy generation, which is discussed in more detail in the Corporate Support Functions chapter. It will also investigate the potential for actions to progress the circular economy in East Dunbartonshire, and to reduce inequalities to support the outcomes of the LOIP; such actions could include details of business support programmes run by Zero Waste Scotland, the Energy Saving Trust and other relevant bodies, and promotion of the Scottish Business Pledge
17, which encourages reduced resource use, waste and 
emissions and which promotes socially-equitable business activity. EDVA, through the East Dunbartonshire Economic Partnership, will play an important role. 
17 www.scottishbusinesspledge.scot
Bishopbriggs Town Centre363636Figure 4 – Indication of service synergies and partnership working for Sustainable Economic GrowthThe Council will also seek to support the transition to a low-carbon economy through its land use planning, transport, 
business support and sustainable development functions.
At a practical level, provision of grant funding information by the Council to local businesses will be enhanced to place 
a stronger focus on sustainability-related grants; this will be supplemented with other relevant information, supporting the actions in the EDS. This work will be supported by the Council’s employability agenda, which is discussed further 
in the Community Capacity-Building section.
Through the EDS, we will measure the sustainability of the local business community by gathering data such as grant 
uptake rates, participation in support programmes and activity to contribute to the circular economy. 
Partnerships: 
Economic Development
Partnership; Milngavie
BID Board
Third Sector: 
East DunbartonshireVoluntary ActionNational bodies: Zero Waste Scotland;Energy Saving TrustCouncil functions:
Economic Development;
Land Planning & Development;Waste Services
Sustainable
Economic  
Growth37Strategic Commitments
In addition to continuing our good practice, and to help us contribute to the delivery of national policy and 
legislation, we will:
• Produce an Economic Development Strategy which aligns the work of Council functions including land  
 use planning, economic development, business support, waste management and sustainable development  
 and contributes to a partnership-led approach to support delivery of a low-carbon economy and sustainable  
 economic growth in East Dunbartonshire, assisting delivery of the Council’s Public Bodies Duties
• Work towards delivery of the circular economy in East Dunbartonshire by exploring options for actions in the  
 emerging Economic Development Strategy and through the work of the Council’s Waste Services function 
• Communicate regularly with the local business community on sustainability 
 
Main objectives covered:
• Reducing carbon emissions
• Reducing material use and waste generation
• Sustainable materials
• Promoting health and wellbeing
• Supporting fairness and reducing inequality
• Supporting local businesses
38Mugdock Country Park
Mugdock CastleA Country Park is an area designated for people to visit and enjoy recreation in a countryside environment. In 
combining protection of ecosystems with health benefits, cultural services and commercial activity, Country Parks represent an important showcase of the inherent links between environmental, social and economic interests.
39Key Drivers
• Countryside (Scotland) Act 1967 
Wider Context
Mugdock Country Park was designated in 1987 and is owned and managed by a Joint Management Committee 
comprising East Dunbartonshire and Stirling Councils. 
Although the majority of the park lies outside East Dunbartonshire, the majority of visitors are East Dunbartonshire 
residents and it is the only Country Park managed by East Dunbartonshire Council. It provides local residents, visitors and tourists with a valuable resource for outdoor recreation and education, and is important to the conservation and enhancement of the Mugdock estate. The estate provides opportunities for outdoor learning, with over 200 events a year, opportunities for volunteering, countryside management of Mugdock Wood Site of Special Scientific Interest (which covers approximately 70% of the park area), and preservation of the important built heritage which includes Craigend and Mugdock Castles, a Second World War gunsite, the walled garden and former stable block which now houses the Visitor Centre, park offices, visitor services, shops and a theatre. In combining protection of the natural environment with commercial activity, Mugdock Country Park demonstrates the value of ecosystems to the economy. 
Current aims of the park include:• To ensure equality of access to all defined leisure opportunities within the park
• To help create and protect a quality environment for our visitors and promote appreciation of this resource
• To help conserve our sites of natural heritage and history
• To ensure ‘Best Value’ is achieved
A Customer Survey Report was published in February 2015
18 and a Business Plan for the park is currently being 
implemented. The Report found that the park is a well-used, popular and much-loved asset. Key considerations in 
relation to sustainability are that:
• The vast majority of users travel to the park by car
• The park has a key role in encouraging play and recreation, although there was some concern that more  
 maintenance was required to the path network
• Craigend Castle is an important part of the local heritage and needs to be stabilised or developed rather than  
 demolished 
• Conservation and ranger-led activities are highly valued with high satisfaction levels
In light of pressures on Council budgets, there is a need to consider how the high standard of the environment and services at the park can be sustained in the future. While the Report found a very high resistance to the idea of charging for entry to the park, a Five-Year Strategy
19 for the park has been developed which recommends savings 
through operational changes and transformation through investment, helping to ensure that the park is more self-sustaining and continues to deliver ‘Best Value’ to safeguard the quality of its services in the future; this will involve building construction and refurbishment, and consideration of new ways in which the natural resources of the park can be used and developed to generate income. 
18 www.mugdock-country-park.org.uk/images//MugdockParkCustomerSurveyReport_Final_Feb15_issued.pdf 
19 Mugdock Country Park – 5 Year Strategy 2015-2020 (Dunira), November 201540Progress and Achievements So Far
By preserving and enhancing the natural environment, and by using it to create social and economic benefits, Mugdock 
Country Park inherently embodies many aspects of sustainability. The park’s Ranger Service is an important part of 
this; the rangers run various programmes and activities centred on environmental stewardship and appreciation, 
including a school programme tied to the Curriculum for Excellence and practical conservation work with voluntary groups, including installation of bird and bat boxes and the creation of orchards and bumble bee gardens. The Ranger Service also contributes to the delivery of the Council’s LBAP and emerging GNS. Active travel is encouraged at the 
park, including via a cycle hire shop.
The inherent sustainability credentials of the park have been built on through the introduction of measures to improve 
the sustainability of the built environment. Solar panels have been powering lighting at Mugdock Castle for over 10 
years and a green roof has been installed at Charlie’s Bar; energy-efficient lighting replacement has also been carried 
out at the Visitor Centre and Stable Block.
Future Actions
Sustainability has been identified as a guiding principle, and an integral part the vision, of the Five-Year Strategy which has recently been developed for Mugdock Country Park; the document identifies Mugdock as a potential “national hub for sustainability and healthy living, and a beacon for excellence in biodiversity conservation and outdoor education”. The Strategy identifies potential to boost the sustainability of the park through path network improvements. There are various other opportunities for enhancing sustainability; these include a potential allotment site, a review of pesticide use within the park and investigation of the financial feasibility of taking a more strategic approach to planting with better promotion of native species.
In light of the fact that the vast majority of users access the park by car, there is a need to develop more sustainable 
transport options including public transport and active travel access. This is challenging due to the location of the park and existing service provision. The East Dunbartonshire Local Transport Strategy (LTS) already contains an action to deliver more sustainable transport solutions, and the Council will explore opportunities in relation to improving active travel as part of the ‘East Dunbartonshire Loop’ proposed by the Active Travel Strategy. As part of this process, funding options will be explored to identify the potential for innovative travel solutions to boost sustainable access.
The Council’s emerging GNS will also support the Mugdock Strategy by having a focus on improving green network 
connections to Mugdock Country Park and by identifying the scope to attract additional funding to support active travel improvements to the park. The Strategy also introduces the option of creating a more visible parking donation scheme at the park, and there may be scope to use some of the income from this to support more sustainable means of accessing the park, including improvement of key path and cycle access routes and signposting.
In terms of the built environment at the park, use of renewable energy technologies is a significant way of achieving 
improved environmental performance and cost savings. The Council, as part of the park’s Joint Management Committee, will stimulate an investigation of the financial feasibility of upgrading the solar panels at Mugdock Castle and will explore the scope for renewables installations elsewhere in the park. Consideration will also be given to introduction of composting toilet facilities at Mugdock Castle, to replace the current chemical toilet. Renewable technologies will be considered for the Stable Block and for the Visitor Centre. Further energy-efficient lighting replacement will be carried out in these buildings, and opportunities for other similar small-scale energy efficiency projects will be sought. Opportunities for sustainable design will also be investigated should new developments be proposed within the park.
40 Milngavie Farmers' Market41The Five-Year Strategy also highlights the potential for green infrastructure, e.g. green roofs and walls, which provides 
opportunities to further enhance the sustainability of the built environment and to establish Mugdock Country Park as a showcase. Green infrastructure offers multiple sustainability benefits; it can promote biodiversity, act as an insulator and reduce flood risk. Craigend Castle presents a particular opportunity; the interpretative barrier system, around the ruined building, that is currently being considered, includes a proposal for green walls. Further use of green infrastructure will be considered where possible, e.g. at Mugdock Theatre and in any new structures that are built.
The park’s existing contribution to education provides a strong foundation to build on. Outdoor education is highlighted 
as a key aspect of the park’s potential future role; the Council will support this by encouraging the provision of signage 
to inform visitors and enable them to act sustainably, including sustainable transport options and education panels 
displaying details of the sustainability measures incorporated into the park’s buildings. The park will also play a lead role 
in delivering the Forest Schools agenda; staff will be trained, and sites will be developed within the park and at other 
appropriate locations in East Dunbartonshire.
The Strategy also proposes the introduction of an ‘adopt-a-tree’ scheme and development of volunteering and 
community involvement in the park. 
Mugdock Castle4242Figure 5 – Indication of service synergies and partnership working for Mugdock Country Park
Strategic Commitments
In addition to continuing our good practice, we will:
• Further develop the sustainability of outdoor areas via path network improvements, a potential allotment  
 site and consideration of more native planting and less pesticide use 
• Explore opportunities for enabling more sustainable travel to the park 
• Encourage the exploration and development of energy efficiency measures, renewables and other  
 sustainable building features at Mugdock Castle, the Visitor Centre and the Stable Block
• Investigate the scope for renewables installations elsewhere in the park
• Consider opportunities for green roofs and walls, e.g. at Craigend Castle
• Further develop outdoor education opportunities, including delivery of the Forest Schools agenda
• Boost community involvement in the improvements of the park
Main objectives covered:
• Reducing carbon emissions
• Reversing biodiversity decline
• Promoting health and wellbeing
• Supporting local businessesMugdock Trust: 
Mugdock Traders GroupPartnerships: Mugdock Country Park Joint Management CommitteeCouncil functions:Economic Development;Land Planning & Development
Mugdock  
Country Park43 Mugdock Country Park44ProcurementSustainable Procurement is “a process whereby organisations meet their needs for goods, services and works in a 
way that achieves value for money on a whole-life basis and generates benefits not only to the organisation but also to society, the economy and the environment” 
20 
45Key Drivers
• Scottish Government National Performance Framework
• Scottish Sustainable Procurement Action Plan 2009
• Public Contracts (Scotland) Regulations 2014
• Procurement Reform (Scotland) Act 2014
Wider Context
Procurement, i.e. the acquisition of goods and services, is a function that underpins, and has a significant influence on, a broad range of organisational activities. East Dunbartonshire Council spends approximately £110 million annually on goods and services; the procurement process offers an important route for determining the social, economic and environmental impacts of these activities and for helping an organisation to achieve sustainability.
20 Scottish Government www.scotland.gov.uk/ Publications/2009/10/sspap 
Sainsbury's, Kirkintilloch, celebrates Fairtrade Fortnight 201246The progress of public bodies in Scotland is measured via the Flexible Framework produced by the UK Sustainable 
Procurement Task Force; the Scottish Government’s monitoring of public sector procurement effectiveness has included a focus on Flexible Framework scores. 
The Procurement Reform (Scotland) Act 2014 introduces a new Sustainable Procurement Duty which commences 
on 1 June 2016, aimed at making sustainable procurement ‘business as usual’ for Regulated Procurements in the public sector in Scotland. The duty focuses on improving economic, social and environmental wellbeing; facilitating the involvement of small and medium enterprises, third sector bodies and supported businesses in the procurement process; and promoting innovation. It supports the Public Bodies Duties required by the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009, reinforcing the impetus for the Council to ensure that it carries out its procurement function in accordance with the principles of sustainability. Forthcoming statutory guidance from the Scottish Government will provide details of how this should be met. 
These national requirements have been translated into corporate commitments; the Council’s Procurement Strategy 
includes Corporate Social Responsibility as a key theme, and the related Sustainable Procurement Policy sets out how this will be delivered on in all contracts for works, goods and services.
Procurement is a complex, multi-stage process; the Council’s Contract Standing Orders set out how procurement is 
undertaken at East Dunbartonshire Council and provide a framework for ensuring that legal compliance and value for money is achieved.
46Figure 6 – Scottish Government’s 10 steps to sustainable procurement (Source: Based on graphic from Scottish Canals Environment Strategy 2015-25)01 Commitment within the organisation
02 Making the commitment public
03 Organisational buy-in
04 Benchmarking and progression
05 Prioritising
06 Specifying sustainably
07 Sustainable procurement process
08 Working with suppliers
09 Measuring performance
10 Publicising your successesIn 2009, the Scottish Government published the Scottish Sustainable Procurement Action Plan, which set out 10 steps 
to achieving effective sustainable procurement:47Progress and Achievements So Far
East Dunbartonshire Council has already established expertise and a reputation in sustainable procurement, which has 
been demonstrated in relation to various contracts. 
• Fair trade tea and coffee options, and fair trade sugar, have been provided in Council buildings for meetings since   
 2005; there is also ongoing provision of fair trade products in schools, where an estimated 10% of total fruit orders  
 carry the Fairtrade Mark
• Fuel use has been reduced in delivery vans and vehicles used for care service provision as a result of efficiencies  
 stimulated via contract conditions
• 95% of end-of-life windows and doors from Council housing are re-used
• A silver-level award has been achieved under the ‘What Wood You Choose?’ programme run by WWF UK, which  
 has led to a reduction in the amount of unsustainably-sourced timber procured  
• A requirement has been introduced for Small and Medium-Sizes Enterprises (SMEs) to be included in the quotation  
 process for low-value contracts; this has been supported by SME engagement processes such as roadshows. 
 SME spend has increased by approximately 30% between 2012-13 and 2014-15. 
The Council has also taken a proactive approach to community benefits clauses, which provide a means of achieving 
sustainability by building a range of economic, social or environmental conditions – e.g. targeted recruitment and training – into the delivery of public contracts. Community benefits are encouraged by the Procurement Reform (Scotland) Act 2014, with a requirement for public bodies to consider the use of community benefit clauses in all contracts over £4 million; the Council adopted this approach ahead of the implementation of the Act, and has applied it across lower-value contracts too. This approach has enabled the Council to yield benefits additional to those already required in contracts; examples include creation of training and employment opportunities, provision of store discount cards for local people, and redesign of windows for Council houses to provide more user-friendly versions with reduced maintenance requirements.
Local social benefits have also been delivered through the Council’s procurement system by engaging the third sector 
and SMEs e.g. via roadshows. 
Local authorities also procure through contracts managed nationally by the Scottish Government and by Scotland 
Excel, who have a sustainability policy and strategy committing the organisation to pursuing sustainability across its activities. Councils have an influence on the development of Scotland Excel’s contracts via User Intelligence Groups, and East Dunbartonshire Council has used this opportunity to encourage sustainability to be embedded in line with the above commitments, e.g. through the contract for Personal Protective Equipment, where requirements for ethical procurement were built into all stages, from tender specifications through to contract management, in line with the 10 steps for sustainable procurement.
Reflecting and building on these achievements, guided by the results of our self-assessment on the Flexible 
Framework and in line with the ‘commitment within the organisation’ aspect of the 10 steps, the Council has recently made strategic commitments to sustainable procurement via our Corporate Procurement Strategy, which identifies Corporate Social Responsibility as a key theme and commits to embedding sustainable procurement. Strategic commitments have also been made via our Sustainable Procurement Policy, which undertakes to meet the Sustainable Procurement Duty; the Policy highlights the importance of whole-life costing and develops the provisions set out in the Strategy by stating that, prior to the introduction of the Sustainable Procurement Duty in the Procurement Reform (Scotland) Act, social and economic community benefit clauses were fully considered for all contracts over £100,000 and that, after the Duty commences in June 2016, this will be extended to contracts over £50,000 and environmental benefits and impacts were also being considered in contracts of the same value, relating to the following areas:
• Construction and construction products
• Electrical Goods
• Transport
• Waste Management
• Cleaning Products and Services
• Furniture• Paper and paper Products
• Food and Catering Services
• Horticulture and Park Services 48Where possible, the Council will seek to maximise joined-up delivery of community benefits with environmental ones.
These strategic commitments are reflected in the Council’s Contract Standing Orders and Procurement Guidance 
Notes, which emphasises the importance of supporting sustainable development as part of the Council’s Best Value 
commitments, and which require that suppliers have a sustainability policy.
Practical mechanisms have begun to be introduced to deliver on these strategic commitments: in line with the 
‘organisational buy-in’ aspect of the 10 steps, a Sustainable Procurement Champion has been designated within the Corporate Procurement Team; Corporate Procurement Advisors have begun to provide advice to contract managers on whole-life costing; a template has been produced for contract strategy documents which includes a table requiring social, economic and environmental issues to be logged; a checklist has been produced for assessing tender documentation; and a contract management approach has been aligned to the Scottish Government’s contract management system, to generate performance management information which will feed into sustainable procurement reports to the Scottish Government to demonstrate delivery on the Sustainable Procurement Duty and to allow publication and benchmarking of our progress. This is supported by measures introduced by the Scottish Government to scrutinise suppliers’ sustainability commitments prior to quotes for low-value contracts being submitted.
In making public commitments, in requesting that suppliers have a sustainability policy, in working across services and 
in making arrangements for generating performance management information to allow benchmarking and progression, we have made good progress in achieving the Scottish Sustainable Procurement Action Plan’s 10 steps to achieving effective sustainable procurement.
Future Actions
We will continue to build on our existing good practice to further improve performance in sustainable procurement, recognising the key role of procurement in helping the Council to deliver on its Public Bodies Duties.
At a strategic level, we will ensure that the requirements set out in the forthcoming Sustainable Procurement Duty 
guidance are reflected in our Sustainable Procurement Policy, revising this document if necessary. 
We will use the Scottish Sustainable Procurement Action Plan’s 10 steps as a framework for delivering on these 
commitments, working towards the following across our procurement activities: 
• Benchmarking and progression
• Prioritising
• Specifying sustainably
• Sustainable procurement process
• Working with suppliers
• Measuring performance
• Publicising our success
PCS Tender, an electronic system for developing and managing contracts, will be a key means of delivering on these commitments. The system, which will be applied to all contracts, will create significant opportunities for the Council to deliver more fully and systematically on its sustainable procurement requirements and commitments throughout the whole system, from the preparation of briefs through to contract management: whole-life costing will be promoted at the specification stage via the ‘category approach’ that the system uses; the contract strategy template, contract management information pack and other tools will be employed more systematically; and monitoring of sustainable procurement will be improved, including via the use of Service Level Agreements and Key Performance Indicators and making use of information that originates at the tender stage and that flows through the whole procurement lifecycle.
These measures will be supported by regular internal communications about sustainable procurement through the 
newly-established Community Benefits Forum to ensure that opportunities for delivering additional environmental, social and economic benefits through community benefits clauses are fully realised. Proactive discussion will also take place between the Council’s Corporate Procurement function, those responsible for procurement of goods and services across the Council and other relevant parties including the Skills for Learning, Life and Work service, to ensure that sustainable procurement requirements and opportunities are understood and delivered on.
4849Figure 7 – Indication of service synergies and partnership working for Sustainable Procurement
Strategic Commitments
In addition to continuing our good practice, we will deliver on the Sustainable Procurement Duty and achieve the 
10 steps to sustainable procurement by:
• Ensuring that our Sustainable Procurement Policy reflects the requirements of the Sustainable Procurement  
 Duty and forthcoming guidance
• Using the PCS Tender system to introduce a more systematic approach to sustainable procurement,   
 encompassing and building on existing systems
• Regularly convene the Community Benefits Forum to facilitate liaison and co-ordination on sustainable   
 procurement within the Council and with key Community Planning Partners and Suppliers 
To allow us to keep track of progress and delivery of actions, we will identify key contracts which will be 
monitored for delivery of our sustainable procurement objectives, and we will establish systems for capturing data relating to these contracts. 
Main objectives covered:
All Sustainable
ProcurementNational Bodies: 
Scotland ExcelCouncil functions:Corporate Procurement;  
Land Planning & 
Development; Skills for 
Learning, Life & Work50Built Environment
BREEAM 'Excellent'-rated Lairdsland Primary School, KirkintillochConstruction and management of the built environment is an important context for pursuing sustainability.  
The development of buildings, their maintenance and the provision of utilities and services can have significant impacts, especially in relation to carbon emissions.
51Wider Context
Construction and demolition is the largest source of waste in the UK, responsible for generating 120 million tonnes 
annually21, and buildings account for approximately a sixth of the UK’s total greenhouse gas emissions22. The 
significant role that buildings have to play in climate change mitigation is reflected in the increasing emphasis on 
emission reduction in legislation and national policy, including stricter standards in Building Regulations and bold targets, including the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009 target for 11% of heat consumed in 2020 to come from renewable sources.
Through the land use planning system, the Council has a significant influence on the way in which the built 
environment in East Dunbartonshire develops. Planning policies and guidance can shape various aspects of development layout and building design; incorporation of renewables technologies, use of sustainable construction materials and sustainable transport connections are some of the features that can be encouraged in developments to promote sustainability. The role of the land use planning system in protecting and promoting sustainability in the built environment is reflected in SPP , which is clear that “the planning system should support economically, environmentally and socially sustainable places by enabling development that balances the costs and benefits of a proposal over the longer term”
23. SPP therefore sets out a range of policies which support a low-carbon economy and climate 
change mitigation and adaptation. The Scottish Building Regulations also strongly support sustainability through the Sustainability Labelling System, which was introduced through the Building (Scotland) Act in 2011. The labelling system was designed to reward the achievement of meeting the standards requirements and encourages developers to meet higher standards including improved energy and emission targets.
In addition to the influence of the land 
use planning system and Buildings Standards, the Council also has direct responsibility for promoting sustainability in its estate of approximately 250 sites (ranging from offices, schools and leisure centres to community halls and sports pavilions) and 3500 houses.Key Drivers
• Building (Scotland) Act 2003
• Town and Country Planning (Scotland) Act 1997, as amended by the Planning etc (Scotland) Act 2006
• Scottish Planning Policy
21 UK Statistics on Waste 2015 www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/487916/UK_Statistics_on_Waste_ 
 statistical_notice_15_12_2015_update_f2.pdf
22 Committee on Climate Change Progress Report 2015 
 www.d2kjx2p8nxa8ft.cloudfront.net/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/6.737_CCC-BOOK_WEB_030715_RFS.pdf
23 Scottish Planning Policy 2014, p9 paragraph 28
SuDS at Lumloch Way, Bishopbriggs52Progress and Achievements So Far 
Sustainability in the built environment is encouraged by policies within the Proposed LDP , which has a commitment 
to sustainability at its core. Policy 2 – Design and Placemaking requires developments to meet various criteria 
including appropriate linkages to transport, green infrastructure connections, sustainable materials, energy, design and 
construction methods; particular emphasis is placed on energy-efficient buildings which make the best use of solar gain, shelter and sustainable drainage systems. Policy 15 – Renewable Energy and Low-Carbon Technology requires developments to support the transition to a low-carbon economy.
The Council’s Building Standards function also encourages sustainable building design by enforcing the legal 
requirements for sustainability set out in the Scottish Building Standards and by enforcing energy performance regulations through the building warrant process, which includes a requirement for Energy Performance Certificates.
The Council has already committed to pursuing sustainability in relation to its own properties via three strategic documents:
1. The Council’s Corporate Asset Management Plan (CAMP) identifies sustainability as a key asset management  
 objective and has project scoring criteria which reflect this. The CAMP commits to introducing biomass and solar  
 PV in all new asset projects and retrofitting where budgets permit, as a minimum; the guidance document that  
 accompanies the CAMP provides detail on sustainability in relation to the design, construction and operational  
 phases of buildings, and the spend-to-save capital bidding process reflects the importance of sustainability.
2. The Council’s CMP provides a context by setting an overall target for corporate carbon  
 reduction – 20% by 2020, relative to 2012/13 figures – and identifies the reduction in energy use of existing  
 buildings as a key means of delivering on this. 
3. The Local Housing Strategy (LHS) also highlights the central role of sustainability and highlights the particular  
 relevance of climate change and sets specific targets for energy efficiency measures in Council-owned properties.
To support these strategic commitments, the Council’s capital funding process reflects the ethos that investing in 
carbon efficiency pays off; allocation is made within the 10 Year Capital Programme for “Energy Spend to Save and Carbon Reduction”, and a reporting process has been established to track the financial pay-offs of these investments. 
Various on-the-ground measures have already been delivered in line with these commitments; several corporate 
buildings have been retrofitted with features such as biomass boilers (e.g. Holy Family Primary School), solar PV  (e.g. Bearsden Academy) and energy-efficient lighting (e.g. Allander Leisure Centre), and similar requirements are being built into the design specifications for new buildings within the Council estate, in partnership with hub West Scotland, e.g. Lairdsland Primary School, which achieved a BREEAM ‘Excellent’ rating and was established as a ‘reference’ primary school and supported by the Scottish Futures Trust.
52
Lairdsland Primary School, Kirkintilloch53Similar measures have been taken in Council housing, in part stimulated by fuel poverty targets in the Local Housing 
Strategy; recent achievements include 3 renewables installations, Scottish Government-funded external cladding and annual capital-funded upgrades. These are supported by a comprehensive awareness-raising agenda delivered by the Council’s Housing Strategy function, involving outreach and training for the general public, Elected Members, key Council officers and partner organisations. 
Future Action
The Council will build on the provisions of the LDP in relation to sustainability in the built environment by developing Supplementary Guidance on Design and Placemaking, which will provide detail on the requirement for all new developments to incorporate sustainable materials, energy, design and construction methods, with particular emphasis on energy and heat-efficient buildings and sustainable drainage systems. Planning Guidance on Renewable Energy and Low-Carbon Technology will also be produced to support LDP Policy 15. We will also develop a District Heating Strategy, to enhance the heat efficiency of new and existing developments; this is further discussed in the Corporate Support Functions chapter. 
Future versions of the CAMP will incorporate strengthened provisions for sustainability, including policy commitments 
for sustainable design features and for the uptake of district heating opportunities where available; sustainability will also be included within the scoring criteria for projects. To support this, teams will work closely together to co-ordinate the delivery of sustainability in the estate. At a practical level, the Primary School Improvement Programme Phase 2 will provide a particular opportunity to further develop these commitments. 5454The forthcoming revision of the Local Housing Strategy provides opportunity for further strategic sustainability 
commitments to be made in relation to Housing, with energy efficiency being given a particular focus; various 
awareness-raising measures will be implemented to deliver on this commitment, including sessions for landlords and 
information for the general public.
Through the CMP , the Council will also continue to retrofit existing buildings with energy efficiency and renewables 
technologies, where opportunities arise, to further achieve carbon reduction and efficiency; the governance structure, processes and financial arrangements in the CMP provide for the ongoing consideration and, where appropriate, implementation, of new projects. 
Figure 8 – Indication of service synergies and partnership working for Built EnvironmentBuilt 
EnvironmentNational bodies: Scottish Futures Trust;hub West ScotlandCouncil functions:Land Planning & Development;Corporate Assets; Housing Strategy55Strategic Commitments
In addition to continuing our good practice, and in line with our statutory responsibilities, we will:
• Produce LDP Supplementary Guidance on Design and Placemaking and on Renewable Energy and Low-Carbon  
 Technology
• Strengthen provisions for sustainability in future version of the CAMP 
• Use the Primary School Improvement Programme Phase 2 as a particular focus for delivery
• Produce a Local Housing Strategy that includes commitments to sustainability, with a particular focus on   
 energy efficiency and awareness-raising
• Consider and, where appropriate, implement new carbon reduction projects, in line with the CMP
Main objectives covered:
• Reducing carbon emissions
• Maximising resilience to the impacts of climate change
• Reducing material use and waste generation
• Sustainable materials
• Maximising opportunities to promote health and wellbeing56Community Capacity-Building
Harvest at Rosebank Allotments, KirkintillochCommunity empowerment is a fundamental aspect of sustainability. It is an important objective in itself and, in building 
capacity for local groups and individuals to deliver change, it can also support the achievement of other sustainability objectives.
57Key Drivers
• Community Empowerment (Scotland) Act 2015
• Community Learning and Development (Scotland) Regulations 2013
Wider Context
Community capacity-building, or community empowerment, is reflected in existing Council activity, particularly through 
the work of the Community Planning Partnership, and will be further developed in response to the Community 
Empowerment (Scotland) Act 2015. The Act places requirements on local authorities and Community Planning 
Partners to enable communities to participate more fully in ownership, management and decision-making relating to land, property and service provision; community-based food growing is a particular focus of the Act. Community empowerment is one of the key objectives of the SCCF and, as such, has been considered in each of the chapters in this document. This chapter focuses on the current and future areas of Council activity dedicated specifically to community capacity-building, and considers the ways in which this agenda links to other key SCCF objectives. (Community capacity-building is also supported by activities covered elsewhere in this document, e.g. volunteering at Mugdock Country Park and community food growing).
The East Dunbartonshire Community Learning and Development (CLD) Partnership has a pivotal role to play in 
delivering the wider requirements of the Community Empowerment (Scotland) Act, with the recently-produced CLD Plan setting out commitments to increase the abilities of individuals and groups to influence issues that affect them and their communities through individual and collective action. Within the CLD agenda, employability is an important theme. The Community Learning and Development (Scotland) Regulations 2013 highlight the relevance of sustainability to the CLD agenda.
CLD sits within the wider context of the ‘Place’ approach which is at the heart of the work that the Council and 
Community Planning Partners carry out with East Dunbartonshire’s most deprived communities. Piloted in Hillhead in 2011, the Place agenda has now been extended to Lennoxtown and Auchinairn; work will be taken forward via a Joint Resourcing Plan and Local Plans for each Place area. 
The criminal justice agenda, which exists to deter and mitigate crime and to sanction and rehabilitate those who violate 
laws, is also relevant; community-based rehabilitation has emerged as a focus of UK Government criminal justice policy, which introduces opportunities in relation to sustainability. East Dunbartonshire Council’s criminal justice work is centred on the ‘Community Payback’ programme, where offenders undertake supervised initiatives to benefit the local community; much of this takes place outdoors. Criminal justice work therefore seeks to improve quality of life for disadvantaged people, and for communities in general, in a setting in which the natural world plays an important role. There are therefore clear overlaps between this work and the aims of the sustainability agenda. While there are no legal requirements for the criminal justice and sustainability agendas to dovetail, there are a range of environmental and social benefits inherent in doing so. 58Progress and Achievements So Far
Sustainable development is identified in the CLD Plan as a cross-cutting theme; in addition to the promotion of 
equalities, the plan recognises the potential synergies between educational goals and the aims of projects that 
protect and enhance the environment. In recognition of this, a seminar was held during 2015 to help empower CLD 
practitioners to build sustainability into their work. 
The Council has demonstrated good practice in promoting employability in ways that support environmental protection; 
the Posi+ programme uses outdoor learning to boost the wellbeing of young people with disabilities, and the wider 
Positive Achievements programme won an RSPB Nature in Scotland Award in 2015 for a conservation initiative run for 
disadvantaged young people in partnership with the Forestry Commission Scotland.
In terms of the wider Place agenda, the importance of community-based food growing has been recognised and 
is being actively explored in Auchinairn. The Council is considering the scope for providing land for food growing in communities across East Dunbartonshire with initial assessment for a new growing site in Milton of Campsie. 
The natural links between criminal justice and sustainability have led to various initiatives being carried out by East 
Dunbartonshire Criminal Justice Social Work Services in partnership with the other Council services, with local environmental improvements featuring strongly. Pathway maintenance is carried out regularly, encouraging active travel and supporting local biodiversity, and bird and bat boxes have been installed along walkways, and at schools, throughout the area. Various greenspaces and growing spaces have also been created; for example, the team has worked with Oxgang Primary School to establish an outdoor classroom and has been involved in the Milton of Campsie Railway Restoration Project to enhance walking and cycling facilities. Sustainability is also incorporated into the methods undertaken in these activities; scavenged materials are used where possible, and efforts are made to compost waste plant material arising from clearances. This work complements the various other approaches undertaken to conserve and enhance biodiversity and greenspace that are discussed in the Natural Environment chapter. 
In addition to local environmental improvements, the Council’s Criminal Justice Service has also collaborated with other 
Council services to support sustainability, e.g. by delivering information and materials to local businesses to encourage a reduction in plastic bag use. 
The success of fair trade in East Dunbartonshire is another example of the Council working with the local community 
to deliver significant advances in sustainability. Through a movement spearheaded by the Milton of Campsie Parish Church Justice and Peace Group, East Dunbartonshire became one of Scotland’s first Fairtrade Zones in 2007 and has held this status for the longest continuous period of any local authority area in Scotland.
 
Future Action
The Council will deliver on the commitment to sustainable development as a cross-cutting theme within the CLD 
Plan, with a particular emphasis on supporting workforce development and collaborative leadership in relation to sustainability. Practitioners’ awareness of sustainability will be regularly encouraged, including via the promotion of local case studies. The employability agenda will provide a particular focus; the Council will pursue work placements within existing sustainable organisations and will work with other organisations to consider opportunities for creating placements with an environmental theme.
In terms of wider community capacity-building, we will deliver on our requirements under the Community 
Empowerment Act by continuing to promote the links between social wellbeing and environmental protection, especially through the community growing agenda; the Council will build on existing work to promote community food growing through the preparation, in consultation with communities across East Dunbartonshire, of a community Food Growing Strategy. The Strategy will establish demand for food growing across the area and identify appropriate opportunities to help meet this demand. 
We also recognise that there are opportunities to work with our communities to realise their potential to play a key 
role in other aspects of sustainability, such as climate change adaptation. In particular, we will build environmental protection and enhancement more widely into the Place agenda, to embrace the inherent links between ‘greening’ activity and social wellbeing; this will include the promotion of existing good practice, especially from the local area,   via existing channels such as the Hillhead Forum and Lennoxtown Champions Group.
5859Figure 9 - Indication of service synergies and partnership working for Community Capacity-Building
Strategic Commitments
In addition to continuing our good practice, and to help us contribute to the delivery of national policy and 
legislation, we will:
• Promote sustainability through the Community Learning and Development Plan, with a particular focus on  
 employability work, and through the wider work of the Community Planning Partnership
• Build environmental protection and enhancement more widely into the Place workstreams
• Maintain regular communications between Community Payback Work Supervisors and the Place,   
 Neighbourhood & Corporate Assets Directorate to ensure that sustainability is an ongoing consideration in  
 criminal justice work
Main SCCF objectives covered:
• Reducing carbon emissions
• Reversing biodiversity decline
• Promoting health and wellbeing
• Promoting community empowerment Partnerships:  
Community Planning 
Partnership, including  
CLD PartnershipThird sector:  
Food growing  
organisationsCouncil functions:Strategic Planning & Place; Social Work; Skills for Learning, 
Life & Work; Land Planning & 
DevelopmentCommunity  
Capacity  
BuildingThe Criminal Justice service is well-placed to respond to opportunities as they arise; Community Payback Work Supervisors will continue to have regular communications with the Place, Neighbourhood and Corporate Assets 
Directorate, to ensure an understanding and ongoing awareness of the ways in which criminal justice can support 
sustainability, and to allow opportunities – including those related to active travel routes, growing spaces and habitat creation and maintenance – to be highlighted and acted on when they arise.60Education for Sustainable Development
Fair Trade Rice Challenge, 2015Wider Context
Education and awareness-raising is a crucial aspect of achieving sustainability across all contexts; this section 
focuses on the Council’s dedicated education, training and communications services delivered through schools, staff 
development and corporate communications activity. (Community-based education for sustainability is covered in the 
Community Capacity-Building chapter).
The importance of education and awareness-raising to the achievement of sustainability is long-recognised; “education 
for sustainable development” was identified at the landmark 1992 Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro as being an essential tool, and its importance has been widely and consistently emphasised since then, including via the recently-concluded UN Decade of Education for Sustainable Development (2005-2014), which aimed to promote sustainable development through all forms of education, public awareness and training. This commitment is echoed in Scottish Government ‘RPP2’ document
24 on delivery of the Climate Change (Scotland) Act which identifies the understanding 
and influencing of behaviour as one of five cross-cutting themes. 
To maintain the momentum created by the Decade of Education for Sustainable Development in relation to schools, 
the One Planet Schools report, Learning for Sustainability25, made recommendations that have been adopted by the 
Scottish Government and the General Teaching Council for Scotland (GTCS). These include the following: 
• All learners should have an entitlement to learning for sustainability
• Every practitioner, school and education leader should demonstrate learning for sustainability
• A demonstrable ‘whole-school’ approach should be taken
• All school buildings, grounds and policies should support learning for sustainability
The current provisions of the Curriculum for Excellence is in line with these ambitions, with sustainability featuring 
prominently in the ‘experiences and outcomes’ which frame the curriculum, with learners being encouraged to engage with a wide range of issues, including climate change, biodiversity, health and social justice, in a holistic way.
Progress and Achievements So Far
Education for sustainability is well established in East Dunbartonshire’s formal education system. To support achievement of the Curriculum for Excellence requirements, the majority of our schools and nurseries participate in the Eco-Schools Scotland programme run by Keep Scotland Beautiful. Dedicated educational programmes focused on fair trade have also been developed for schools and nurseries, run by the East Dunbartonshire Fair Trade Steering Group; seven East Dunbartonshire schools have been awarded the highest FairAchiever School Award, with several other schools awarded FairActive and FairAware awards. Outdoor education in East Dunbartonshire’s schools is supported by a dedicated Outdoor Education Officer employed by the Council, whose role includes provision of Grounds for Learning training for teachers. The Mugdock Country Park Rangers also provide a valuable outdoor education service both in Mugdock Park and, where possible, in settings local to schools.
61Education for Sustainable Development allows every human being to acquire the knowledge, skills, attitudes and values necessary to shape a sustainable future.
Key Drivers
• Low Carbon Scotland – Meeting the Emissions Reduction Targets 2013 - 2027
• One Planet Schools ‘Learning for Sustainability’ Report 2012
24 Low Carbon Scotland – Meeting the Emissions Reduction Targets 2013 – 2027 www.gov.scot/Resource/0042/00426134.pdf
25 One Planet Schools ‘Learning for Sustainability’ Report 2012 
 www.gov.scot/Topics/Education/Schools/curriculum/ACE/OnePlanetSchools/LearningforSustainabilitreport 62The achievements within the classroom and in practical settings are demonstrated by a wide variety of case studies, 
including the following:
• In Kirkintilloch, Hillhead Primary School’s Community Garden has been a popular and beneficial initiative engaging  
 pupils, parents and the wider community; a previously-flooded area is now a showcase for food-growing, waste  
 re-use and nature conservation and brings learning to life across many areas of the curriculum including Maths  
 and English 
• St Matthew’s Primary School in Bishopbriggs, a ‘Cycle Friendly School’, has worked with ED’s Cycle Co-op and  
 other local community partners to encourage and support pupils, parents, staff and the wider community to  
 increase cycling and reduce private car use
• Milngavie Primary School has developed a comprehensive approach to diverting waste from landfill; organic  
 waste is composted, the Council-run paper recycling service is used as an opportunity to learn about weighing and  
 monitoring, and a range of other materials are regularly collected, raising money for charity
• East Dunbartonshire’s schools and nurseries have pioneered fair trade education and action, including running pilot  
 schemes for ethical school uniforms and Fair Trade Nurseries, both of which were later rolled out in other parts of  
 Scotland
• Forest Kindergarten training has been provided to Council nurseries 
• The Council provides a recycling service to all schools
Awareness of sustainability is promoted with teachers through Continuing Professional Development sessions; the West of Scotland Development Education Centre (WOSDEC) runs sessions for primary and secondary teachers, which are supported by the Council, and fair trade CPD sessions run by the East Dunbartonshire Fair Trade Steering Group are also supported.
Sustainability is also promoted to the wider public through the Council’s communications agenda. Sustainability news 
is regularly issued via press releases, social media, events and campaigns such as Earth Hour and Fairtrade Fortnight. Awareness-raising in the workforce is also promoted via regular features in the Council’s staff magazine, Edit.
Future Action
To support delivery of the GTCS standards, consideration will be given to whether further support is required to promote awareness and build capacity in relation to the sustainability aspect of teacher self-evaluation.
Schools will also be encouraged to report on sustainability progress via their annual Standards and Quality Reports, 
and a strategic steer will be provided in future updates of the Curriculum for Excellence Strategic Plans. This will be supported by promoting Eco-Schools Scotland’s recently-updated resources and by introducing a system for monitoring participation in East Dunbartonshire’s schools and highlighting areas for action. 
A formal communication mechanism will be considered, to facilitate systematic dialogue between the Education 
Service and other relevant Council teams and services, particularly Facilities Management, on matters relating to building fabric and services including recycling, helping the Council to meet carbon reduction and recycling targets. 
Provisions for outdoor learning will be enhanced by the introduction of the Forest Schools agenda to schools and 
nurseries; the aim of Forest Schools is to instill a deep appreciation of the natural world and to use it as a setting for cross-curricular learning. (This will be supported by Mugdock Country Park, and is further discussed in that chapter). To ensure a consistent and co-ordinated approach by the various relevant Council Services to the expansion of Forest Schools in East Dunbartonshire, a protocol will be considered.
In terms of awareness-raising in Council staff, the Council’s HR service offers an important role. The People 
Development Team within Human Resources (HR) leads the employee learning and development agenda and has various opportunities to promote understanding of sustainability across the workforce, creating and communicating organisational values. This will be done in various ways, including via induction training and the introduction of an elearning module on sustainability.
To ensure more systematic promotion of sustainability to the public via existing channels, and to encourage two-
way dialogue, a rolling (‘dynamic’) Communications Plan will be produced to set out planned timing and theming of messages. 
6263Figure 10 – Indication of service synergies and partnership working for Education for Sustainable Development
Strategic Commitments
In addition to continuing our good practice, we will:
• Investigate the scope to promote awareness and build capacity, within education centres, in relation to   
 sustainability requirements within GTC standards
• Investigate the scope to establish systems for monitoring schools’ participation in Eco-Schools Scotland   
 and highlighting areas for action, and for encouraging sustainability to be routinely incorporated into school  
 planning and reporting
• Consider a formal communication mechanism between Education and other relevant Council services to  
 allow dialogue on building fabric and services 
• Enhance provisions for outdoor learning, including further Forest Kindergarten and Schools training
• Produce a Dynamic Sustainability Communications Plan to allow more systematic promotion of sustainability  
 to staff and the wider public 
• Identify opportunities to create and communicate organisational values through internal communications  
 and the Employee Learning and Development agenda 
Main objectives covered:
All Third Sector: 
East Dunbartonshire Fair Trade Steering GroupNational bodies: Keep ScotlandBeautiful; ForestryCommissionScotlandCouncil functions:
Education; education 
centres across East 
Dunbartonshire;  
Land Planning 
& Development; 
Economic 
Developement 
(Mugdock Country 
Park); Organisational 
Developement Education for  
Sustainable  
Development64FinanceFinancial considerations are a crucial aspect of sustainability; the economy is one of the three pillars of sustainability, 
and economic considerations are inextricably linked to environmental and social ones.
65Wider Context
The Local Government in Scotland Act 2003 requires that a local authority which secures Best Value will be able 
to demonstrate a contribution to sustainable development. This involves consideration of the social, economic and 
environmental impacts of its activities and decisions both in the shorter- and longer-term. The Government’s ‘Best 
Value Guidance’ states that this means “that there is a systematic approach to the management of resources which contributes to the achievement of sustainable development”.
26
The Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009 implements Public Bodies Duties which place all public authorities under a statutory obligation to exercise their functions in a way that contributes to the delivery of greenhouse gas reduction targets and that helps to deliver the government’s climate change adaptation programme.  A public authority should also act in a way that it considers is most sustainable. The Public Bodies Duties Guidance states that “Public bodies both contribute directly to greenhouse gas emissions and may also play a key role in relation to greenhouse gas emissions in the wider environment through the way they exercise their functions in relation to policy, service delivery, etc.”
27 
While the Guidance does not explicitly refer to the role of investments in relation to Best Value and the Public Bodies Duties, it is clear that it would be inconsistent for an organisation to work towards supporting the greenhouse gas reduction targets and sustainability objectives on the one hand while making investment decisions which undermine these targets and objectives on the other.
Using material resources creates costs for organisations, some of which are borne corporately and some of which 
are borne by others - often those who are already disadvantaged. When an organisation provides finance to other organisations through investment and borrowing activity, further unsustainable resource use can result. 
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), in their 5th Assessment Report
28, have stated that 
combustion of fossil fuels must be substantially reduced and should be stopped by 2100 if dangerous climate change 
is to be avoided. Action pledges made by the international community as part of the Paris Agreement on climate change in December 2015 are intended to contribute to preventing dangerous climate change. These place further emphasis on the need to keep fossil fuels in the ground to limit greenhouse gas emissions.
As pressure to reduce emissions grows, organisations including local authorities are subject to increasing charges 
relating to carbon emissions, with instruments such as the Carbon Reduction Commitment Energy Efficiency Scheme, the Climate Change Levy and the Scottish Landfill Tax already attaching significant and growing costs to emissions. Carbon emissions also create future costs; the Stern Review
29 highlighted this at a macro level, estimating that the 
cost of inaction would be equivalent to losing at least 5% of global GDP each year, which is five times the estimated cost of taking action.
These drivers are reflected in both the principle of Best Value and Sustainable Development and the Public Bodies 
Duties, which create a further imperative for public sector organisations to reduce emissions.
As an organisation facing significant budgetary pressures and with a reputational and ethical obligation to limit the 
impacts of its activities, the Council must ensure that internal and external costs, and the impacts associated with these, are minimised. Key Drivers
• IPCC Fifth Assessment Report, 2014
• Local Government in Scotland Act 2003
26 Scottish Executive, Best Value Guidance, (2003), p21
27 Scottish Government, Public Bodies Climate Change Duties: Putting them into Practice, (2011)
28 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change’s Fifth Assessment Report (2014) www.ipcc.ch/report/ar5/syr 
29 The Stern Review: The economics of Climate Change (2006), N Stern www.hm-treasury.gov.uk/sternreview_index.htm66Progress and Achievements So Far
Supporting our CMP , the Council has established mechanisms that encourage recognition and reduction of costs 
associated with unsustainable practices, especially relating to carbon, within its own spending activities – the Finance 
Team and Energy Officers work together to monitor spend on utilities and to react to excessive or unpredicted 
consumption, and, as discussed in the Built Environment chapter, the capital funding process encourages and monitors whole-life costing in new projects (especially property-related ones), which supports sustainability by identifying costs related to inefficient resource use. This is supported by the Scottish Government’s Central Energy Efficiency Fund 
(CEEF), which has enabled spend-to-save initiatives by creating a revolving fund, administered by the Council, which 
has funded energy efficiency and renewables projects and reinvested savings from these projects into future ones. 
Salix funding is also being used to support carbon reduction – the Council’s high-profile LED (light-emitting diode) street lighting replacement is supported by Salix funding. The requirements of the Policy Development Framework and 
Programme Management Office, discussed later in the Corporate Support Functions chapter, also play a supporting 
role in corporate carbon management. 
In terms of investments and borrowing, the Council works with various bodies; key among these are the Public Works 
Loan Board, the Bank of Scotland, Royal Bank of Scotland, Santander and Strathclyde Pension Fund. Throughout its borrowing and investment activity, the Council does not directly invest in the fossil fuel industry. 
Future Actions
We will continue to invest in energy efficiency and renewable technologies in our own estate to reduce the Council’s contribution to greenhouse gas emissions through direct investment; this is further discussed in the Built Environment chapter. We will also consider the scope for reducing indirect support for the fossil fuel industry through policy on savings, investments and borrowing, to further contribute to our statutory duties to mitigate carbon emissions and contribute to sustainable development.
The Council’s position will be reviewed to identify whether opportunities exist for the development of a policy on fossil 
fuel investment. This will be implemented through the Council’s Treasury Management and Investment Strategy and will include participation in any pan-Council Scottish reviews of ethical investment policies.
66
67Figure 11 – Indication of service synergies and partnership working for Sustainable Finance
Strategic Commitments
In addition to continuing our good practice, we will deliver on our Public Bodies Duties by:
• Considering the introduction of a policy on fossil fuel investment through savings, investment and borrowing,  
 examining whether our investments are consistent with our statutory duties in relation to climate change   
 mitigation and sustainable development
• Participating in any future pan-Council discussions on ethical investment policies 
Main objective covered:
Reducing carbon emissionsSustainable
FinanceNational bodies: 
Salix Finance LtdCouncil functions:
Finance; Land Planning  
& Development68Sustainable Transport and Travel
Streetscape at Cowgate, Kirkintilloch69Transport is the fastest-growing contributor to greenhouse gas emissions. Moving away from carbon-intensive, 
private transport towards decarbonised, more efficient, more active forms of travel offers a wide variety of benefits 
environmentally, socially and economically.
Wider Context
The Scottish Government’s second report on proposals and policies (RPP2) for meeting its climate change targets30 
includes statistics which show that transport-related carbon emissions, including international aviation and shipping, 
make up just under a quarter of Scotland’s total emissions; two thirds of these emissions come from road transport. Furthermore, transport is the fastest-growing contributor to greenhouse gas emissions. Emissions from cars account for just over half of land-based transport emissions; while average vehicle emissions per kilometre are falling steadily as a consequence of improved engine efficiencies, these gains have been offset by increased car travel. The significance of road transport emissions is such that the Scottish Government aims for an almost complete decarbonisation by 2050, with significant progress by 2030.
Vehicle emissions contain other pollutants including nitrogen dioxide and particulate matter, which can cause 
deterioration in local air quality; two areas within Bishopbriggs and Bearsden are currently designated as Air Quality Management Areas, and consideration is being given to designating a third in Kirkintilloch. Creation and expansion of roads also presents environmental challenges in terms of habitat loss, which is discussed in the Land Use chapter, and use of construction materials, the impacts of which are discussed in the Built Environment chapter.
In addition to environmental issues, the transport sector has significant implications in terms of human health and 
wellbeing. Obesity is an increasing problem in Scotland; while contributing factors are numerous and complex, changing transport patterns are recognised as playing a significant role, with active travel being emphasised as a priority means of tackling the epidemic
31. Human health is also affected by vehicle emissions, with traffic-related air 
pollution being linked to significant health issues in Scotland32.
The proportion of the Council’s corporate carbon footprint arising from fleet transport is smaller than that of the Scottish average, at 8%; this is partly due to the measures that have already been taken to reduce emissions. While the contribution of our fleet transport to our carbon footprint is relatively low, it is still significant and it is important that efforts continue to be made to minimise the impacts of our vehicles. 
 Key Drivers
• Scottish Planning Policy 
• Scotland’s National Transport Strategy
• A Catalyst for Change – The Regional Transport Strategy for the West of Scotland 2008-21
• A Low Carbon Economic Strategy for Scotland
• Low Emission Strategy for Scotland
• Cleaner Air for Scotland – The Road to a Healthier Future
• Cylcing Action Plan
• National Walking Strategy
30 Low Carbon Scotland – Meeting the Emissions Reduction Targets 2013 – 2027 (‘RPP2’) www.gov.scot/Resource/0042/00426134.pdf
31 E.g. SPICe Briefing – Obesity in Scotland (2015) www.scottish.parliament.uk/ResearchBriefingsAndFactsheets/S4/SB_15-01_Obesity_in_Scotland.pdf 
32 E.g. Friends of the Earth Scotland’s ‘Air Pollution in Scotland’ briefing 
 www.foe-scotland.org.uk/sites/www.foe-scotland.org.uk/files/Air%20pollution%20in%20Scotland.pdf 70Local authorities have an important role to play in the move towards sustainable transport. The role of the land use 
planning system is key; SPP 2014 sets sustainability as one of two principal policies, and the East Dunbartonshire LTS and LDP look to follow SPP principles, creating environments that are easy to move around within, without placing the needs of motor vehicles above people. The National Transport Strategy 2006
33, refreshed in 201534, also provides 
an important strategic context; reflecting the measures within RPP2 and setting three strategic outcomes promoting sustainability, it stresses the need for effective integration and land use planning, emphasising the role of transport in reducing inequalities, promoting resource efficiency and supporting a low-carbon economy. The vision of the Regional Transport Strategy for the West of Scotland
35 is in line with this; the document seeks to deliver “a world class, 
sustainable transport system that acts as a catalyst for an improved quality of life for all”. 
Local authorities’ economic development functions are also important; the role of transport in achieving a low-carbon 
economy is highlighted in A Low Carbon Economic Strategy for Scotland36.
70“The proportion of the Council’s corporate carbon footprint arising from fleet transport is smaller than that of the Scottish average, at 8%; this is partly due to the measures that have already been taken to reduce emissions.”
33 www.gov.scot/Resource/Doc/157751/0042649.pdf 
34 www.transport.gov.scot/strategy/national-transport-strategy
35 www.spt.co.uk/wmslib/Documents_RTS/catalyst_for_change.pdf
36 Scottish Government, ‘Low Carbon Economic Strategy for Scotland’ (2010) www.gov.scot/resource/doc/331364/0107855.pdf71Progress and Achievements So Far
East Dunbartonshire Council’s Place, Neighbourhood & Corporate Assets Directorate is responsible for the production 
and delivery of Council policy in relation to transport. The emerging LDP has a commitment to sustainability at its core, 
and this incudes provision of sustainable transport. The LTS 2013-2017, which is currently being revised, supports this, 
seeking a reduction in private car use across East Dunbartonshire in line with the transport hierarchy which identifies reduction in travel need and active travel as priorities. The LTS has three action plans, including one for public transport, which outlines the role of Scotrail, Strathclyde Passenger Transport and bus operators in delivering public transport 
throughout East Dunbartonshire and which emphasises, and seeks to realise, the benefits of bus and rail travel. The 
action plan for active travel has now been superseded by the Council’s Active Travel Strategy
37, approved in 2015, 
which sets out a range of actions for infrastructure and behavioural changes aimed at making walking and cycling an 
attractive and feasible travel choice, in line with the Council’s support for the Cycling Action Plan for Scotland and the National Walking Strategy.
Various practical measures have already been undertaken to encourage sustainable transport in East Dunbartonshire: 
• Projects have been delivered to improve infrastructure for sustainable transport, including the first phase of the  
 Bears Way segregated cycle route on the A81
• Travel hubs have been delivered on the A81, at rail stations, to provide a transport interchange facility; more are  
 planned for the A803 corridor
• The East Dunbartonshire Core Path Plan commits to improving health and wellbeing and reducing traffic congestion  
 and pollution. Recent upgrades have been carried out on the major path networks in East Dunbartonshire; these  
 include the Strathkelvin Railway Path, the Forth and Clyde Canal Towpath, the Allander Walkway and the Balmore  
 Path. This work has been carried out in conjunction with Scottish Canals and with funding partners Sustrans, WREN  
 and Strathclyde Partnership for Transport.
• The Council is working with Abellio Scotrail to facilitate active travel by installing cycle parking at East  
 Dunbartonshire’s train stations, and is participating in the process of producing Scotrail’s Local Stations Strategy
• Transport Assessments are required to be submitted for all major developments and are assessed by the Council  
 against a set of criteria in which sustainable travel is prioritised. Travel Plans are also required for larger housing  
 developments and schools. 
• The Healthy Habits project has helped to encourage active travel in Kirkintilloch, Lenzie, Bishopbriggs, Bearsden and  
 Milngavie by installing clear and informative signage on all paths and routes
Cognisance has also been taken of the potential impacts of sustainable transport measures in terms of material 
use and waste generation; Ultitrec, a 100% recycled material using road planings, is regularly used in path network 
upgrades including the Allander Walkway, the Balmore Path and the Strathkelvin Railway Path. Paths at Mugdock 
Country Park have also been developed using construction and demolition waste.
Provisions for sustainable transport have also been made at a corporate level. The Council is a corporate member of 
Liftshare, the online car-sharing facility. Showers, lockers and cycle shelters have been installed at the Council offices 
at The Marina, Southbank House and Broomhill to encourage more staff to cycle to work, helping to reduce congestion 
while providing health benefits. A full-time ‘iBike Officer’, part-funded by Sustrans, provides cycle training to children in 
East Dunbartonshire.
Significant changes have also been introduced to the Council’s vehicles in recent years, driving an ongoing move 
towards a cleaner, more efficient fleet. Recent projects, as described in the Council’s CMP , include the replacement, 
in 2014/15, of 11 social and educational transport vehicles at ‘Euro 4’ standard with reduced-emission ‘Euro 5’ models. 
New pool cars have also been introduced, which reduces reliance on ‘grey’ (staff-owned) fleet and therefore offers 
substantial benefits in relation to commuting miles; these are low-emission vehicles, a proportion of which are electric, 
which reduces the direct emissions associated with business travel, in support of the Council’s carbon reduction targets, and also reduces fuel costs. Such activity is supported by the Council’s vehicle replacement programme 
through which a percentage of vehicles are subjected each year to planned substitutions with models that meet 
stricter emissions standards. 
37 www.eastdunbarton.gov.uk/residents/planning-and-building-standards/planning-policy/transport/active-travel-strategy7272Future Action 
The revised LTS is due to be published in 2017 and will be informed by a robust evidence base including route corridor 
studies for the A81 and A803, published in 2015. These studies consider transport interventions that are assessed 
against criteria specified in Scottish Transport Appraisal Guidance (STAG), in which sustainable transport is prioritised. 
Both studies were aimed at reducing the area’s reliance on private car journeys. 
The LTS will be delivered through projects that provide enhanced physical infrastructure and softer measures such 
as information provision and behavioural change. There is also an opportunity for more systematic use of recycled 
materials in path creation; the Place, Neighbourhood & Corporate Assets Directorate will endeavour to incorporate 
recycled materials, as a priority, into path construction projects and will also pursue other elements of resource efficiency and sustainable sourcing. 
The Healthy Habits initiative will be extended across East Dunbartonshire, as funding allows. Community engagement 
will also be undertaken to encourage awareness of, and participation in, active travel.
The Council will also continue to lead by example by pursuing sustainable transport corporately. At a strategic level, 
a corporate travel planning document will be produced, with the aim of reducing single-car journeys; this will be encouraged through various means, including better promotion of car sharing, stricter requirements for school travel plans, exploration of opportunities for pool bikes, promotion of pool cars and, in line with the Council’s SMART working ethos, encouragement for staff to consider the need to travel at all. A personalised travel planning approach will be taken to provide staff with information tailored to their individual needs. Cycling in schools will be facilitated by the delivery of mentoring training to teachers, supported by the creation of an additional ‘iBike’ officer role. To gain external verification of our work in relation to cycling, and to facilitate continuous improvement, the Council is working with Cycling Scotland towards becoming a Cycle Friendly Employer.
Emissions from the Council’s fleet will continue to be tackled via the current programme of fleet replacement,  
which will run until the end of financial year 2016/17; further electric vehicles will be introduced, pending availability  of Scottish Government funding. Consideration will also be given to the introduction of fuel-efficient driver training.  Full details of fleet-related measures are provided in the Council’s CMP and related annual reports.
Cyclists on the Forth and Clyde Canal73Figure 12 – Indication of service synergies and partnership working for Sustainable Transport and Travel
Strategic Commitments
In addition to continuing our good practice, we will:
• Prepare and deliver on a revised Local Transport Strategy that prioritises active travel
• Incorporate use of recycled materials into path creation more systematically and pursue other elements of  
 resource efficiency and sustainable sourcing 
• Produce a corporate travel planning document and achieve Cycle Friendly Employer status
• Continue fleet replacement until end of 2016/17
• Introduce further electric vehicles, pending funding
• Consider fuel-efficient driver training 
Main objectives covered:
• Reducing carbon emissions
• Maximising resilience to climate change
• Sustainable materials
• Reversing biodiversity decline
 Partnerships: 
SPTNational bodies:
Cycling Scotland;
Scotrail Alliance;Sustrans; SNH;Scottish CanalsCouncil functions:
Land Planning 
& Development; 
Economic 
Development
Sustainable
Transport &  
Travel74Corporate Support Functions 
East Dunbartonshire Council Headquarters, The MarinaIn addition to the front-line services covered in the preceding chapters, there are a number of Council functions 
relevant to the SCCF that, for the purposes of this document, can collectively be described as corporate support functions.
These processes and provisions stimulate the embedding of sustainability-related statutory requirements and best 
practice into Council plans and projects; as such, they offer an important route for the mainstreaming of sustainability 
across Council services, helping to achieve statutory requirements such as the Public Sector Bodies Duties under the 
Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009 and the requirement for a contribution to sustainability under local authorities’ 
statutory duty of Best Value. They also highlight the value of pro-sustainability approaches such as whole-life costing. 
Dedicated Services
1. Sustainability Policy Team
Part of the function of the Council’s Sustainability Policy Team is to work in partnership with other teams across the Council to improve performance in delivering, and to ensure we meet our statutory duties in relation to, sustainability 
and climate change. While responsibility for improving performance therefore rests across services rather than with 
one dedicated team, the Sustainability Policy Team provides policy support in relation to the activities mentioned in the 
previous chapters and leads on the development and monitoring of policies and other measures that are relevant to multiple services and therefore require effective co-ordination. 
A key function of the Sustainability Policy Team is to lead the Council’s climate change planning and reporting 
processes; the team co-ordinates the Council’s CMP , which was updated in 2015, and produces the Public Bodies Duties Climate Change Reports for the Scottish Government, a statutory requirement commencing in 2016 for which a pilot phase was run in 2015.
The Sustainability Policy Team has identified several priority policy areas for future development to support improved 
performance in relation to sustainability and climate change:
• A District Heating Strategy will be produced to identify opportunities to deliver a greener, more cost-efficient source  
 of heat, with particular emphasis on corporate buildings and housing stock, while also identifying opportunities to 
 collaborate with the wider public sector and the private sector
• A Biomass Strategy will be considered, acknowledging the potential opportunities relating to Corporate Asset  
 Management and Economic Development among other areas of Council interest
• A revision of the Council’s Fairtrade Resolution, originally passed in 2004, will be undertaken in partnership with  
 the East Dunbartonshire Fair Trade Steering Group, to co-ordinate commitment and action across the organisation,  
 including Corporate Procurement, Facilities Management, Education and Economic Development
• The Council’s Green Office Policy and related arrangements – including the Green Office Champions Network – will  
 be re-examined in partnership with Waste Services (see below), HR and Corporate Communications to consider the  
 most appropriate strategic commitments, service provision and communication mechanisms
To support this work, and in line with the aforementioned commitment to an evidence-based approach, the 
Sustainability Team will use sound science responsibly and introduce other policies and strategic documents in line with the objectives of the SCCF , as required, e.g. in response to research findings on inorganic, non-biodegradable substances (including synthetic chemicals), which is a rapidly developing area of science. 
7576762. Waste Services
The Council also has a service area dedicated to waste management. Waste Services provide a waste collection and 
recycling service to households across the area, which includes food waste recycling; commercial waste collection and recycling services are also offered to businesses. Council office waste is collected as part of the domestic collections, with waste composition analysis being undertaken annually. 
In addition to providing collection services, Waste Services engage in regular, proactive awareness-raising in 
partnership with Corporate Communications, with reduction and re-use being promoted as well as recycling. Waste Services also work with the Council’s Planning function to encourage the incorporation of recycling facilities into new buildings. 
These measures have led to significant reductions in the amount of waste being sent to landfill, with the tonnage 
dropping by over a third between 2010/11 and 2014/15. These figures are backed up by recycling rates; in 2014/15, East Dunbartonshire Council was the highest-yielding Scottish local authority in terms of food waste recycling. 
The Council will continue to promote and support domestic and commercial waste minimisation and will encourage 
waste reduction in the local business community via the circular economy agenda, as discussed in the Sustainable Economic Growth chapter. 
LOIP
The East Dunbartonshire LOIP sets out the strategic priorities for the work of the Council and Community Planning Partners, identifying six local outcomes that reflect the economic, social and environmental challenges of the area. 
As outlined earlier, sustainability is integral to the vision of the LOIP . Sustainability is explicitly referred to in one of 
the six local outcomes – “East Dunbartonshire is a safe and sustainable environment in which to live, work and visit” – and is implicit throughout, with recognition of the importance that “the outcomes of our actions and activities are considered in terms of social, economic and environmental sustainability.” 
The Sustainability Policy Team will work with Strategic Planning & Place, and with our Community Planning Partners, to 
ensure that sustainability continues to be embedded in future versions of the LOIP . 
Business Improvement Plans
Business Improvement Plans (BIPs), produced annually, allow each Council Directorate to clarify its own strategic priorities in achieving business improvement, to demonstrate how it will contribute to the delivery of the LOIP and to set out the performance management and reporting frameworks which support and measure the success of that delivery. BIPs are required to be prepared in accordance with the ‘Directorate Performance Guide’ which ensures a robust and consistent approach to business improvement planning. The BIP must include a range of requirements including the need to assess the policy environment, identifying legal and environmental issues among others, and state how the work of the Directorate will contribute to sustainable development generally, and to the specific priority of addressing climate change. Directorates report quarterly on their BIP performance through the ‘How Good is Our Service’ (HGIOS) self-evaluation tool. An annual end-of-year HGIOS report is published and is publicly available. 
The Sustainability Policy Team will continue to work together with Strategic Planning to assess BIPs. Stricter BIP 
submission timescales are also being introduced; this will create an opportunity for the sustainability and climate change commitments in each document to be assessed by the Sustainability Policy Team, and will allow time for any amendments to be made. The delivery of sustainability through BIPs will be enhanced by a new requirement for forthcoming plans, policies and strategies (PPS) to be recorded to ensure that a consistent and robust approach to assessing PPS for their potential environmental effects is followed across the Council. The HGIOS self-evaluation framework will be used to allow the capture information about recently-produced PPS, supporting the annual Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) Audit. This approach will not only help ensure that we are meeting our statutory duties in relation to SEA but will also enable a more systematic approach to be taken to mitigating any adverse effects of PPS on the environment and consider how our plans and policies can work together to maximise environmental benefits and minimise environmental damage. 77Policy Development Framework and Programme Management Office
The Policy Development Framework (PDF) and the Programme Management Office (PMO) also play a key role in 
guiding the development of new policy documents and project plans as they arise.
The PDF provides an integrated approach to ensuring that new policies being developed by the Council are robust and 
credible; it includes requirements for SEA, Risk Assessment and Equality Impact Assessment:
• SEA fosters a sustainable approach by requiring comprehensive consideration of environmental issues and some  
 social dimensions. SEA provides a systematic assessment process for considering the likely significant  
 environmental effects of all strategic actions and raises the profile of the environment in decision-making  
 processes. It also creates full transparency by incorporating various levels of consultation together with public and  
 key agency involvement.
• The Risk Assessment requirement further supports sustainability by emphasising, and fostering management  
 of, the risks involved in unsustainable activity, with a particular focus on climate change. Two of the Council’s Risk  
 Registers for former Directorate areas (Neighbourhood Services and Development & Regeneration) include  
 reference to the Council’s CMP and the SEA process, and the Civil Contingency Register, which forms part of the   
 Risk Assessment Process, includes categories for flooding, drought and prolonged cold weather.
• Equality Impact Assessment requires all policy decisions to be considered in relation to ‘protected characteristics’  
 including gender, disability and race, allowing services to take action to prevent direct and indirect discrimination  
 and to enhance the promotion of positive community relations 
The more recent introduction of the PMO further supports sustainability by encouraging the financial tracking of spend-
to-save projects; projects that have been supported by the PMO process include biomass and LED installations. 
To maximise the potential of the Risk Assessment process in highlighting the strategic importance of climate change, 
the Sustainability Policy Team, in working towards the preparation of a range of indicators to measure the delivery of sustainability and climate change priorities, will identify significant risks, where relevant, for incorporation into the Risk Register.
The PDF will also be kept under review and amended as necessary, to ensure that it supports sustainability to its full 
potential.
The PMO process will also help to mainstream sustainability across Council activity by encouraging it to be 
incorporated into project management procedures. The ‘Detailed Business Case’ stage of project management is particularly relevant, as this is where detailed proposals are set out and agreed by Council; a requirement will be set in relation to this aspect of project management, with a focus on identifying ‘benefits’ and ‘disbenefits’, in relation to sustainability, offered by the proposed project. Support will be provided to practitioners through workshops and guidance, and a reporting requirement will be introduced.“East Dunbartonshire is a safe and sustainable environment in which to live, work and visit.”Strategic Commitments 
In addition to continuing our good practice, we will:
• Produce a District Heating Strategy for East Dunbartonshire
• Consider the production of a Biomass Strategy for East Dunbartonshire
• Contribute to the revision of the Council’s Fairtrade Resolution
• Strategically develop the Council’s Green Office agenda
• Ensure that sustainability is appropriately represented in the LOIP
• Build sustainability into Leadership and senior management events, materials, meetings and  
 communications 
• Support the BIP and HGIOS process to ensure full support of SEA requirements for PPS and full support of  
 sustainability and climate change duties
• Identify significant climate change risks, where relevant, to incorporate into Risk Register
• Review and amend the PDF , as necessary
• Use the PMO process to require the inclusion of sustainability in project management procedures
• Consider opportunities for reflecting sustainability and climate change within staff contracts and via other  
 behaviour change initiatives 
Main objectives covered:  
All
7878HR
The contribution of the Council’s HR function to sustainability was discussed in the chapter on Education for 
Sustainable Development. In addition to this role, HR will support sustainability by emphasising its strategic, cross-
Council importance through Leadership events and materials, meetings between HR Business Partners and Directors 
and communications issued by the Chief Executive and Directors. The Sustainability Policy Team and HR will also work together to examine opportunities for reflecting, within staff contracts, the need to support the delivery of our statutory duties in relation to climate change and sustainable development; other opportunities for promotion of behaviour 
change for improved sustainability performance will also be considered. Wood carving at Kilmardinny Loch Local Nature ReserveThis document can be provided in large print, Braille or on audio CD and can 
be translated into other community languages. Please contact the Council’s Corporate Communications Team at 12 Strathkelvin Place, Kirkintilloch,  Glasgow G66 1TJ Tel: 0300 123 4510Other formats
Printed onFSC paper