Carbon Reduction PlanEast Lindsey District Council 
August 2020
Context
Growing acknowledgement of the latest science and recommendations from the Committee on Climate 
Change have resulted in unprecedented recognition of the global climate emergency and the need to act 
urgently in order to reduce carbon emissions to limit further global warming and associated environmental 
impacts. Global initiatives are now focused on limiting warming to well below 2oC, aligning to the pledges 
outlined in the Paris Agreement. Despite this, warming continues, with the impacts being felt both 
nationally and internationally. Across the UK, continued warming is projected to make winters warmer and 
summers hotter and drier. Sea levels will also continue to rise and threaten many coastal communities 
across the country. Many industrial and farming processes will also be affected by a continuation of rising 
temperatures, exacerbating impacts that warming will have on communities across the UK. 
In 2019, the UK Government became the first major economy in the world to pass laws to end its 
contribution to global warming by 2050 by setting a target of achieving net zero emissions by 2050. Local 
authorities have a crucial role to play in developing effective pathways towards reducing their emissions, 
which. If successfully achieved, will help to reduce climate impacts at both the local and national scale as 
well as delivering public health co -benefits resulting from cleaner air and leading a more active lifestyle .
East Lindsey District Council recognises the significant role it can play in helping to accelerate the national 
transition towards developing a low carbon economy and has included a strategic aim within its new 
corporate strategy to adapt to meet the challenge of a changing natural environment . This report has 
been commissioned by the Council to help achieve their carbon reduction targets.
Executive summary 3Contents
Section 1: Council target 10
Section 2: Carbon footprint 12
Section 3: Carbon reduction opportunities 21
Section 4: Governance and engagement 34
Section 5: Monitoring and reporting 36
Appendices 38
3Executive summaryExecutive summary
•This Carbon Reduction Plan forms a key step in East Lindsey District Council’s (ELDC) 
response to the climate crisis and sets out a number of strategic actions that ELDC 
should work towards in order to achieve their carbon reduction target. ELDC previously 
developed a Carbon Reduction Plan in 2009, which has now been updated to reflect the 
Council’s new climate commitments.
•To lead by example and encourage the District as a whole to undertake similar steps, 
ELDC is committing to an ambitious target of reducing its carbon emissions to net zero 
by 2040, with a minimum emissions reduction of 45% by 2027. 
•Achieving the target will reduce emissions from 2,583 tCO2e in 2019 to 1,421 tCO2e/year 
in 2027, before progressing to net zero by 2040 . Moving towards this ambition will 
solidify ELDC’s recognition of the wider climate crisis we are all facing, whilst showing 
the Council’s local leadership role in climate change action.
•This action plan suggests a number of projects that, alongside the expected 
decarbonisation of the national electricity grid, will contribute to the Council achieving 
its carbon reduction target. 
Overview of the World Resource Institutes GHG Protocol accounting methodology
Scope 1 •Gas consumption for space and water 
heating in buildings •Council vehicle fleet fuel consumption
Scope 2 •Electricity consumption in buildings
Scope 3 •Emissions from employee commuting
•Business travel in non -Council fleet vehicles•Third -party disposal and treatment of 
waste generated in Council -controlled 
operations Emissions included within the carbon 
footprint and targeted with projects:4Carbon footprint overviewExecutive summary
East Lindsey District Council’s carbon footprint for the calendar year 2019 was 
calculated to be 2,583 tCO2e. Six emissions categories make up this total carbon 
footprint:
1. Fuel consumption in the Council’s fleet (1,336 tCO2e)
2. Gas consumption in buildings (196 tCO2e)
3. Electricity consumption in buildings (463 tCO2e)
4. Employee commuting (473 tCO2e)
5. Business travel (112 tCO2e)
6. Waste emissions (4 tCO2e)
•The carbon reduction target set by the Council contains all of the stated 
emission categories here, including selected scope 3 emissions (business 
travel, waste and commuting) from sources outside of the Council’s direct 
operational control.
•These Scope 3 emissions make up 22% of the total footprint. The Council 
will therefore have to integrate carbon management in its interactions with 
contractors, employees and operators to achieve its decarbonisation 
targets, as well as focusing on the assets under their operational control.
ELDC emissions by scope
59% 19%22%
Scope 1 Total Scope 2 Total Scope 3 Total
195.51,336.2
462.9
111.8
3.7473.2
050010001500
Electricity Gas Fleet Business
TravelWaste Commuting
Scope 1 Scope 2 Scope 3Emissions by source / tCO2e55
Carbon reduction opportunities overviewExecutive summary
To achieve the first emissions reduction target of 45% by 2027 the Council needs to reduce scope 1, 2 and selected scope 3 em issions by approximately 194 
tCO2e /year. The Council will then have to decarbonise at a rate of 109 tCO2e /year between 2027 and 2040 in order to achieve net -zero by 2040. The following 
target areas have been identified across the Council, with relevant reduction opportunities identified for each. These projec ts will assist ELDC on the pathway 
towards the goal:
The projects identified in this plan have the potential to reduce ELDC emissions from 2,583 tCO2e/year to just 15 tCO2e/year by 2040. 
The total estimated cost to implement the above projects is approximately £301,100, not including any costs associated with i mprovements required to 
decarbonise the refuse Heavy Goods Vehicle (HGV) fleet or replacing Tedder Hall with a more energy efficient office site. The project proposals in this plan have 
been based on high level and remotely accessed information and benchmarks. All projects will require full feasibility assessm ents to be undertaken to establish 
a detailed cost -benefit analysis.
Upgrading street and 
promenade lighting under 
ELDC’s control to LED and 
introducing advanced 
controls Public lighting 
Replacing existing internal 
combustion engine vehicle fleet 
with battery powered electric 
vehiclesFleet electrification
Roll out of regular driver 
training and 
comprehensive telematics Fleet management
Encouraging low carbon 
transport modes and mileage 
management strategiesCommuting and travel
Roll out of energy 
efficiency and renewable 
energy measures Council buildings
Centralised or remote 
control and monitoring of 
HVAC* systemsCouncil offices
*Heating Ventilation AirConditioning (HVAC)66
050010001500200025003000
2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033 2034 2035 2036 2037 2038 2039 2040
Project Emissions Target Emissions BAU EmissionsOverview of the Carbon Reduction PathwayExecutive summary
Projection of total ELDC business as usual emissions, the effect of proposed projects and the ‘net -zero by 2040’ target
NB. projected UK grid electricity decarbonisation is included within the BAU pathway
R1 –Energy Management
R2 –Mileage ManagementR3 –Driver Training 
R4 –Remote HVAC* SystemsR5 –Fan and Pump Upgrades
R6 –LEDsR7 –Vehicle Fleet Electrification
R8 –Tedder Hall & Skegness Town 
Hall to be replacedR9 –Space Heating Electrification
R10 –Refuse Fleet Electrification
R1, R2, R3
R4, R8 R5 R6R7 R9
R10
2027 
target
*Heating Ventilation AirConditioning (HVAC)77
Greenhouse Gas Removals
Meeting ELDCs net -zero 2040 target will need more than just extensive cuts to emissions. It will also require the 
active removal and storage of Greenhouse Gases (GHGs) from the atmosphere in a process known as GHG 
removal. GHG removals are a carbon offset mechanism for cancelling out GHG emissions through anthropogenic 
methods. These include m ethods such as growing forests, enhancing mineral weathering and direct capture of 
CO2 from the air. 
ELDC has committed to a net-zero target, which requires any residual emissions to be addressed using 
greenhouse gas (GHG) removals only. This is in contrast to a carbon neutral target under which avoided 
emissions carbon offsets (e.g. investing in renewable energy projects) are also permissible.
The exact level of GHG removals required by ELDC is still not clear and guidance is expected to progress between 
now and 2030. (The World Resource Institute and the Carbon Trust are developing a new accounting standard 
for GHG removal, which is due for public comment in 2021). It is recommended that the Council agree on several 
principles around which a specific GHG removal strategy can be built as the sector develops. Any strategy should 
include the principles of: 
a. Reductions before removal. GHG removal should only be explored after efforts to achieve reductions within 
an organisation’s emissions boundary have been fully explored.
b. Additionality. The reductions achieved should be additional to what would have happened in the absence of 
the project.Executive summary
888
Next steps
Building on the analysis and suggestions provided throughout this action plan, it is now important for ELDC to 
conduct a further, more detailed feasibility assessment of individual project opportunities. This will ensure 
that the Council is able to quantify appropriately and take forward more confidently the provisional 
opportunities identified here. Considering the current emissions ‘hot spots’ (certain Council -owned buildings 
and fleet), ELDC should prioritise and coordinate efforts towards these emissions sources in the first instance, 
using the contents of this Carbon Reduction Plan for further iterations of project development. 
The Council should use the initial quantifications provided (energy, carbon and cost -saving potential) as a 
building block for the development of further detailed business cases going forward. The information shown 
in this plan should be clearly communicated -along with explanation of the limitations to what has been 
done -and shared with key decision makers across the organisation.
Putting in place an early immediate action plan to build on the findings of this Carbon Reduction Plan will 
help to ensure carbon reduction remains a key part of the Council’s agenda going forward, also allowing the 
necessary budgets and organisational/governance structures to be developed accordingly. Executive summary
9Executive summaryContents
Section 1: Council target
Section 2: Carbon footprint
Section 3: Carbon reduction opportunities
Section 4: Governance and engagement
Section 5: Monitoring and reporting
Appendices
1010Section 1: Council targetSection 1: Council target
East Lindsey District Council has set a target of reducing its carbon emissions to net zero by 2040, with a 
minimum emissions reduction of 45% by 2027 . This target covers a range of emissions sources that are under 
both direct and indirect control of the Council (Table 1). 
The ambition of East Lindsey District Council’s carbon reduction target demonstrates the Council’s intention to 
act against the causes and impacts associated with climate change. The Council must now work towards reducing 
its carbon footprint in order to achieve its targets, building and accelerating on the emissions reductions that 
have previously been achieved across the organisation. This plan therefore details initial actions and key 
mechanisms required in order to work towards reducing emissions by at least 45% by 2027. It builds on the 
Carbon Reduction Plan developed by ELDC back in 2009 and reflects the Council’s newly declared climate 
commitments, progress and latest developments. ​
The first step in developing this action plan is establishing an up -to-date carbon baseline, particularly as some of 
this data has not been collected previously for ELDC. This baseline provides the reference from which to start a 
full analysis of the current emissions, their magnitude and who is responsible for them.
Scope 1 •Natural gas
•Vehicle fleet
Scope 2 •Electricity
Scope 3 •Operational waste
•Business travel
•Employee commuting
Table 1: Footprint boundary for East Lindsey District 
Council’s net zero target
10Executive summaryContents
Section 1: Council target
Section 2: Carbon footprint
Section 3: Carbon reduction opportunities
Section 4: Governance and engagement
Section 5: Monitoring and reporting
Appendices
1212Section 2: Carbon footprint
East Lindsey District Council has set a target of reducing its carbon emissions by at least 45% by 2027, as well as endeavour ingto become net -zero carbon by 
2040. These targets cover emissions sources that are under direct and indirect control of the Council (Table 1, previous page ). 
This section provides an inventory of ELDC greenhouse gas emissions for the calendar year 2019 –the ‘baseline’ against which fu ture progress will be evaluated.
Scope
ELDC’s footprint has been calculated according to the World Resources Institute (WRI) 
Greenhouse Gas (GHG) Protocol, and aligns to the following accounting definitions: 
•Direct GHG emissions are emissions from sources that are owned or controlled by the 
reporting entity
•Indirect GHG emissions are emissions that are a consequence of the activities of the reporting 
entity, but occur at sources owned or controlled by another entity
The GHG Protocol further categorises these direct and indirect organisational emissions into 
three broad scopes (Figure 1):
•Scope 1: All direct GHG emissions
•Scope 2: Indirect GHG emissions from consumption of purchased electricity, heat or steam
•Scope 3: Other indirect emissions, such as the extraction and production of purchased 
materials and fuels, transport -related activities in vehicles not owned or controlled by the 
reporting entity, electricity -related activities not covered in Scope 2 (e.g. transmission and 
distribution losses) , outsourced activities, waste disposal, etc.Section 2: Carbon footprint overview
Figure 1: Overview of the World Resource Institute’s GHG Protocol accounting methodology1313
Section 2: Carbon footprint methodologySection 2: Carbon footprint
A carbon footprint is calculated by multiplying activity data (e.g. litres of vehicle fuel, kWh of electricity/gas) by 
an associated emissions factor:
•Where possible, real activity data should be collected throughout the reporting period for use in the footprint 
calculation.
•Emissions factors are updated annually and published by the UK Government’s Department for Business, 
Energy and Industrial Strategy (BEIS).
If activity data is not available, various benchmarks and proxies can be used: 
•Benchmarks can be used to approximate activity data. For example, typical electricity consumption per m2
floor area of a building. 
•When input data is scarce, proxy factors can be used in place of the BEIS factors to approximate emissions 
from the available input data (e.g. contract value).
General calculation methodology 
to calculate carbon emissionsInput/ activity data
•kWh (utilities)
•Litres or km (fuel)
•£ (contract value)
•m2 (floor area)Carbon factor
•BEIS factor 
(kgC02e/unit)
•Proxy factor e.g. 
(kgC02e/£ spent)Carbon emissions (kgC02e) = xEmissions are calculated by multiplying activity 
data by an emissions factor:
In carbon footprinting a common unit of 
carbon dioxide equivalent (CO2e) is used, 
which allows the impact of each of the 
seven main greenhouse gasses to be 
expressed in terms of the amount of CO2
that would create the same amount of 
warming.
14Section 2: Carbon footprint
Scope 1 emissions [S1] :
•Gas consumption, typically space and water 
heating in buildings 
•Council vehicle fleet fuel consumption
Scope 2 elements [S2] :
•Electricity consumption throughout ELDC
Scope 3 elements [S3] :
•Business travel in non -Council fleet vehicles
•Third -party disposal and treatment of waste 
generated in Council -controlled operations 
•Employee commuting based emissionsSection 2: Scope of carbon footprint
ELDC Footprint 2019
Non -Council 
operations
Employee Commuting
Council operations
Building emissions
Electricity 
consumption
Gas 
consumption
Waste 
generation & 
treatment
Transportation 
emissions
Council -
owned fleet
Business 
mileageScope 3
Scope 2 Scope 1 Scope 1 Scope 3
Scope 3
An explanation of excluded 
emissions is included in Appendix 11515
Section 2: Carbon footprint
Inthe2019 calendar year, 2,583 tCO2ewere emitted from theCouncil’s own operations and associated activities .
•Scope 1:gas(primarily forheating buildings) and transport fuel consumption intheCouncil’s own fleet ;
•Scope 2:electricity consumption within ELDC buildings used byELDC staff ;
•Scope 3:waste generation, business travel (arising from ELDC -operated buildings, journeys completed byELDC
staff and councillors onbehalf ofELDC activities) and employee commuting .
The Council will need toreduce itsfootprint toatleast 1,421 tCO2eby2027 toachieve theinterim 45%carbon
reduction target, representing anaverage annual reduction of194 tCO2e/year until 2027 .The council willthen
have todecarbonise atarate of109 tCO2e/year between 2027 and 2040 inorder toachieve net-zero by2040 .Section 2: East Lindsey District Council Footprint 2019
Total emissions [tCO2e]
Scope 1
Natural Gas FleetScope 3
Employee
CommutingWaste Business travel2,583
1,532 589
196 1,336473 4 111Scope 2
Electricity463
463
*Emissions figures have been rounded tothenearest whole number1616Section 2: Carbon footprint
ELDC’s footprint is primarily made up from three emissions categories (so -called emission hotspots):
51.7% of emissions are associated with fuel consumption in the Council’s vehicle fleet 
25.4% of emissions  are from electricity and gas consumption in the Council’s buildings
22.6% of emissions come from business travel and commuting 
These emissions hotspots should be at the forefront of the Council’s carbon reduction efforts and are the focus of the recomm endations made in this report.Section 2: East Lindsey District Council Footprint 2019
59% 19%22%
Scope 1 Total Scope 2 Total Scope 3 Total2,583 
tCO2e
195.51,336.2
462.9
111.8
3.7473.2
040080012001600
Electricity Gas Fleet Business
TravelWaste Commuting
Scope 1 Scope 2 Scope 3Emissions by source / 1717Section 2: Carbon footprint
•The greatest opportunities forreducing fleet emissions come from electrification .
•East Lindsey District Council’s fleet consists ofapprox .101 vehicles .
•The furthest alight fleet vehicle (van orcar) drives inayear isapprox .38,270 miles, assuming
operation 200 days oftheyear, yielding adaily average of191 miles peroperational day.This iswithin
therange ofatypical electric vehicle .
•98%ofallfleet emissions arise from the use ofdiesel, compared to2%from petrol .Although diesel
vehicles are more efficient from akgCO2/mile perspective, they release more harmful particulate
matter and more NOXand SOXgases –major contributors tolocal airpollution .
•Heavier vehicles (HGVs and refuse trucks) arecurrently much harder todecarbonise .Inthenear term,
abetter understanding oftelematics and age and efficiency ofvehicle should beconsidered .Itmay
then beeasier toconvert fuel (toCNG forexample) than toelectrify .Hotspot 1: Transport Emissions from Operational Fleet
11.232.7252.5273.11,082.2
0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200Gardening & MaintenanceSmall CarsVansRefuse Trucks & Road SweepersHGVs
Emissions (tCO2e)Transport emissions from Operational Fleet1818
Section 2: Carbon footprint
•Tedder Hall HQand Skegness Town Hall contribute approximately 86%ofthe Council’s total gas-related
carbon emissions .
•The total figure displayed inthepiechart below (195 tCO2e)excludes upstream scope 3elements related to
theextraction, refining and transportation ofnatural gas.
•Options formitigating emissions from gas heating include substitution with district heating systems and
electric heat pumps, aswell asimproving building fabric materials toimprove heating efficiency .
•Electricity emissions are likely todecrease year onyear asmore renewables are integrated into the UK
national electricity grid and more coal power plants aredecommissioned .
•ELDC’s main offices account forthemajority ofelectricity emissions (51%).
•Energy efficiency measures, such asreplacing filament and fluorescent lightbulbs with LEDs, can aidELDC in
reducing their electricity footprint .
Tedder Hall 
HQ, Manby 
Park : 96.1 Skegness 
Town Hall : 
71.2Others: 
28.2Gas emissions / tCO2e
Hotspot 2: Buildings Emissions from Gas and Electricity
195 tCO2e
288.7129.136.226.58.9
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350OfficePublic LightingIndustrialLeisurePublic ToiletsElectricity Emissions by Site Type /tCO2e1919Section 2: Carbon footprint
Hotspot 3: Commuting and Business Travel
•Caremissions from commuting and business travel account forasizeable portion (22%)ofELDC’s total
emissions .There isclear agreement across industry, government and the public that future travel /
commuter networks must emit fewer emissions and help theUKmeet net-zero targets
•Strategies forreducing travel emissions include reducing the number ofjourneys people make, for
instance bymaking optimal use oftechnology -based solutions such asvideo -conference calls .The
coronavirus pandemic hasaccelerated new ways ofworking fororganisations, from which wecanlearn .
Flexible working practices, such asworking from home where possible, offer asolution tomitigating the
carbon emissions associated with commuting .
•Utilising less carbon intensive modes oftravelling, such aspublic transport, cycling orusing low-
emission private vehicles, isanother potential solution .These solutions can save theCouncil and/or its
employees money, reduce congestion and improve people’s health .
71.075.347.149.612.311.6318.2
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350Small petrol car, up to 1.4 litre engineSmall diesel car, up to 1.7 litre or underMedium petrol car, from 1.4 - 2.0 litresMedium diesel car, from 1.7 to 2.0 litreLarge petrol cars, above 2.0 litresLarge diesel car, over 2.0 litreAverage car (unknown fuel)Emissions from Commuting & Business Travel
Emissions (tCO2e)Executive summaryContents
Section 1: Council target
Section 2: Carbon footprint
Section 3: Carbon reduction opportunities
Section 4: Governance and engagement
Section 5: Monitoring and reporting
Appendices
21212121Section 3: ELDC Carbon Reduction Short -term Opportunities -SummarySection 3: Carbon reduction opportunities
Projects have been phased according totheestimated cost pertonne ofcarbon dioxide equivalent abated (CAPEX £/tCO2e),with themost cost efficient projects deployed first
(CAPEX refers tothecapital expenditure required toupgrade individual technologies/buildings) .
IMPORTANT NOTE :The costs, technologies and emissions provided inthis report areestimates and theorder (CAPEX /tCO2e)may besubject tochange when actual quotes are
received from contractors asindividual technologies mature and projects progress .Allsuggestions aresubject tofurther feasibility/design studies and procurement processes .
Emissions source RecommendationEstimated CAPEX
GBPAnnual emissions 
saving
tCO2eCost efficiency
£/tCO2eAnnual cost 
saving
GBPPayback period
years
Council offices Improve standard of energy management & staff awareness £0 16 £0 £3,400 instant
Commuting & travel Mileage management £0 56 £0 £0 instant
Vehicle fleet Driver training & performance management £20,200 148 £136 £46,300 0.4
Council offices Centralised/remote control and monitoring of HVAC systems £10,000 40 £248 £8,000 1.3
Council offices, foreshore 
leisure infrastructureFan & pump upgrades £5,400 18 £307 £1,800 3.0
Public toilets Upgrade public toilet lighting to LED £3,100 8 £403 £4,300 0.7
Public lighting Upgrade promenade lighting to LED £6,900 11 £604 £6,900 1.2
Council offices Full LED lighting roll out across council offices £35,300 40 £873 £10,600 3.3
Vehicle fleet Electrification of car & van fleet £200,000* 230 £957 £69,100 2.9
All Total £301,100 568 n/a £149,300 2.0
*Revenue figure ifleased (CAPEX ifpurchased outright est.£1.6m).Year 1cost estimate includes EVcharging infrastructure and cost difference between leasing EVs and conventional fuel vehicles .
Future year costs expected todecrease astheEVmarket develops .22222222Additional ELDC Carbon Reduction Opportunities –longer -termSection 3: Carbon reduction opportunities
The opportunities listed below are likely torequire significant capital investment and some are subject toplanning application and/or suitable technologies
becoming available onthemarket .These recommendations have been setoutseparately from those ontheprevious pages asitisunderstood they arelikely to
beviewed byELDC aslonger term opportunities/investments, some ofwhich may not bepractically implementable immediately, i.e.not within the next 1-3
years .
Itshould benoted, however, that these measures areestimated toreduce theCouncil’s footprint byover 50%.
Electrification ofvehicle fleet and space heating systems recommendations assume that electricity isprocured onrenewable electricity tariffs until the UK
electricity grid mix fully decarbonises .
The emissions savings provided inthis report are estimates and may besubject tochange if/when individual projects progress and are subject tofurther
feasibility studies and procurement processes .
Emissions source RecommendationEstimated CAPEX
GBPAnnual emissions 
saving*
tCO2e£/tCO2eAnnual cost 
saving
GBPPayback period
years
Council offices Replace Tedder Hall with new Head Office site TBC 265 TBC TBC TBC
Vehicle fleet Electrification of refuse fleet TBC 1,097 TBC TBC TBC
Council offices, leisure 
facilitiesElectrification of all space heating TBC 233 TBC TBC TBC
All Total TBC 1,595 TBC TBC TBC23232323The costs, technologies and emissions provided are estimates and the figures may be subject to change when actual quotes are received from contractors, as individual 
technologies mature and projects progress. Further assumptions and information can be found in Appendix 3. 
Council offices carbon reduction opportunities (1)Section 3: Carbon reduction opportunities
ELDC operates a number of ‘office’ sites (offices, town halls, business centres), which account for ~70% of the emissions ass ociated with the Council’s natural gas 
and electricity consumption. The largest contributor to this footprint by far is Tedder Hall, which accounts for ~58% of offi ce-based emissions. It is understood 
that a proposed new -build office site will eventually become ELDC’s head office, however, there remains uncertainty around the f uture use of Tedder Hall. It is 
also understood that the second largest contributor to office -based emissions, Skegness Town Hall, will not be used by ELDC as a n office in the longer term. With 
these considerations in mind, it is notrecommended that any significant investment is made at ELDC’s office sites until future considerations are taken into 
account. However there are a number of low cost or “no regret” actions that should be considered at these sites, alongside th e larger capital investment 
decisions that have been highlighted later in this report. These primarily concern the treatment of the energy consumption at all sites as a controllable resource 
(by implementing management procedures such as those outlined below); upgrading controls for heating, ventilation and air con ditioning (HVAC) so that these 
multiple systems can be controlled and monitored remotely; upgrading fans and pumps within these systems; and upgrading fluor escent lighting to LED. 
Manage energy usage
•Appointment of senior staff 
member at each site with 
responsibility for energy, and 
energy champions appointed
•16 tCO2e/year saving
•67,750 kWh/year saving
•£3,400/year cost saving
•Internal time only cost
LED lighting upgrade
•Upgrade 85% of existing fittings 
to LED units (remainder already 
LED)
•40 tCO2e/year saving
•142,800 kWh/year saving
•£10,600/year cost saving
•£35,300 nominal costHVAC control upgrades
•Centralised/remote control of 
HVAC systems across 9 sites
•40 tCO2e/year saving
•194,600 kWh/year saving
•£8,000/year cost saving
•£10,000 nominal cost
Fan & pump upgrades
•Replacement of ageing fans and 
pumps with more efficient 
models
•18 tCO2e/year saving
•18,600 kWh/year saving
•£1,800/year cost saving
•£5,400 nominal cost24242424Further assumptions and info can be found in Appendix 3. Council offices carbon reduction opportunities (2) Section 3: Carbon reduction opportunities
As described earlier in this section, the largest contributor to the Council’s ‘office’ carbon footprint by far is Tedder Hal l, which accounts for ~58% of office -based 
emissions. It is understood that a proposed new -build office site will eventually become ELDC’s head office. Therefore, we have modelled the impact of replacing 
Tedder Hall with a Building Regulations Part L2A compliant new -build office building. While actual in -use building consumption m ay vary, this provides a useful 
high level theoretical comparison against measured consumption at Tedder Hall. 
Should the construction of the new Head Office go ahead this offers a one -off opportunity for ELDC to lock in significant and pe rmanent carbon savings, 
therefore, ensuring that the building is designed to be as low carbon as possible is vitally important in ELDC’s journey towa rdsnet-zero . Any increase in capital 
costs as a result of lower carbon design will be recouped in lifetime operational costs and avoided emissions. Achieving opti mal low/zero carbon performance in a 
new build by design from the outset is much more practical and cost -effective -even if it means slightly higher initial capital costs -than attempting to retrofit in 
years to come, once the building is built and in use.
Replace Tedder Hall with new head office
•265 tCO2e/ year 1 estimated saving
•985,330 kWh/year saving 
•10% reduction in total Council footprint 
25252525Electrification ofthe gas-fired space heating systems within Council offices and Council -operated leisure facilities represents asignificant carbon reduction
opportunity .While replacing (insome cases) relatively efficient gas-fired heating systems with airsource heat pumps (ASHPs) isnot expected toresult in
significant energy orcost savings, this could potentially reduce ELDC’s carbon footprint by~9%.
ASHPs can often beconnected toexisting infrastructure toreduce installation costs ;however, adetailed evaluation ofeach site will berequired toassess the
feasibility ofconnecting with existing hotwater pipework, radiators, ducting and soon.
​Afulldetailed feasibility assessment should beconducted toascertain more accurate costs and savings before moving forward with these measures .
N.B. Should electrification of space heating systems be implemented, the predicted savings stated elsewhere in this report fr om fan/pump upgrades and 
BEMS/heating control optimisation may need to be discounted to avoid double -counting of emissions reductions. This has been acco unted for in the Carbon 
Reduction Pathway in this plan. 
Electrification of space heating carbon reduction opportunities (3)Section 3: Carbon reduction opportunities
Electrification of space heating 
•Replacement of gas -fired heating systems with Air Source Heat 
Pumps (ASHPs)
•233 tCO2e/year saving
•9% reduction in total Council footprint
Further assumptions and information can be found in Appendix 3. 
26262626
Public lighting carbon reduction opportunities (4)Section 3: Carbon reduction opportunities
ELDC has responsibility for over 500 MWh per annum of public lighting across the District. Some of this, e.g. footway lightin g, has already been upgraded to LED 
however some less efficient lighting remains. ~50,000 kWh of energy consumption relates to promenade lighting columns at Mabl ethorpe, which are assumed 
to be low pressure sodium units. No information has been received regarding their state of repair (or column upgrade needs). Based on electricity consumption 
data, public toilet lighting is responsible for ~36,000 kWh of electricity consumption per annum and is understood to be a mi x of low and high frequency 
fluorescent luminaires. Energy savings of 60 -80% are assumed achievable by upgrading promenade and public toilet lighting to app ropriate LED alternatives. 
Once LEDs are installed, additional savings will also be possible through implementing “control” savings such as dimming and/ or trimming. Beyond energy and 
carbon savings, ELDC would also benefit from reduced maintenance and lamp replacement lifecycle costs thanks to the significa nt additional burn hours that 
LED alternatives bring over traditional lighting.
Illustrative energy and cost savings for full LED upgrades are detailed below. Maintenance savings and potential savings thro ugh centralised management or 
trimming have notbeen included. A full detailed feasibility assessment should be conducted to ascertain more accurate costs and savings before moving 
forward with these measures. 
Promenade lighting upgrades
•LED upgrade of existing low pressure sodium lamps
•11 tCO2e/year 1 estimated saving
•£6,900 estimated capital cost (£3k/kW installed)
•40,400 kWh/year saving 
•£5,800/year cost saving 
Further assumptions and information can be found in 
Appendix 3. 
Public toilet lighting upgrades
•LED upgrade of existing fluorescent luminaires
•8 tCO2e/year 1 estimated saving
•£3,100 estimated capital cost (£1.8k/kW installed)
•27,200 kWh/year saving 
•£4,300/year cost saving 
Further assumptions and information can be found in 
Appendix 3.  27272727There areanumber ofdriver training and performance monitoring actions that could betaken toreduce ELDC’s recorded fuel useand related carbon emissions .
Improvements intheperformance monitoring ofwaste fleet drivers have been made recently (e.g.assigning drivers their own vehicle .More could stillbedone,
however, tomonitor and promote efficient driving across thewaste fleet, e.g.KPIs, driver league tables, inclusion offuel efficiency indriver performance reviews .
Based onexperience ofsupporting clients toimplement driver monitoring, wehave conservatively estimated that ELDC could achieve a5%reduction inwaste
fleet emissions byimproved monitoring and management ofdriver performance .
Driving style has abigimpact onallfleet fuel efficiency and driver training can reduce fuel consumption and emissions, aswell asmaintenance costs and risks
ofaccidents .Typically training cansave around 5-10%**.Sustaining these savings over thelonger term ischallenging, sowehave assumed that alldrivers offleet
vehicles attend thetraining twice between 2021 and 2030 .We have estimated that ELDC could achieve a7%reduction infleet emissions byensuring that all
drivers attend driver training .
Adetailed feasibility assessment should beconducted toascertain more accurate costs and savings before moving forward with these measures .
Driver training: all fleet
•Driver training for all fleet 
vehicle drivers
•94 tCO2e/year saving
•35,750 litres diesel/year saving
•£45,000/year cost saving
•£20,200 nominal costFleet management carbon reduction opportunities (5)Section 3: Carbon reduction opportunities
**Department of Transport, 2016, Efficient Driving https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/509972/efficient -
driving -rapid -evidence -assessment.pdfDriver performance 
management: waste fleet
•Performance management of 
waste fleet drivers
•55 tCO2e/year saving
•20,900 litres diesel/year saving
•£1,300/year cost saving
•Internal time only cost
Further assumptions and information can be found in Appendix 3. 
28282828The current fleet operated byELDC consists of~90vehicles, themajority ofwhich arediesel fuelled .Inorder toreach azero emission transport system atransition
from afossil fuel powered fleet toafleet powered bylow emission energy sources such aselectricity, hydrogen orother zero carbon fuels isessential .This
transition toalow carbon transport system islikely tobeachieved predominantly through theuseofbattery powered Electric Vehicles (EVs), however theCouncil
willremain open toexploring alternative future technologies (such ashydrogen fuel cellvehicles) asappropriate .
Electrification ofthis fleet would lead tosignificant carbon reduction .Toquantify this opportunity, itishas been assumed that alldiesel vans and company cars
(total of65vehicles) willbereplaced bycomparable EVsfrom 2021 ,while mileage willremain constant .Rollout ofelectric orother zero carbon fuelled HGVs should
follow once thetechnology becomes readily available forHGVs .The Council isopen toother forms oflow orzero carbon transport that may bemore appropriate
given theregion’s geography, such ashydrogen fuel cellvehicles, orbiofuels .
​Currently, themajority ofthefleet isowned bytheCouncil (not operated onalease basis) .The estimated capital costs below show two procurement alternatives
1)outright ownership and 2)leased .The cost ofEVcharging points and supporting infrastructure isincluded inthe costs .When considering the benefits and
disadvantages ofoutright purchase vsleasing ofEVs there areanumber offactors toconsider, e.g.depreciation, servicing and maintenance costs, available EV
grants, fleet replacement cycles, expected mileage, pace ofmarket and technology advancements and battery life.
Afulldetailed feasibility assessment should beconducted toascertain more accurate costs and savings before moving forward with these measures .
Fleet electrification carbon reduction opportunities (6) Section 3: Carbon reduction opportunities
Fleet electrification
•Replacement of 65 diesel and petrol fleet vehicles with EVs and 
installation of charging points
•230 tCO2e/year saving
•Costs:
1. £1.6m estimated capital cost (outright purchase x 65 
vehicles + installation of charging points)
2. £200k estimated revenue cost (annual lease cost x 65 
vehicles + installation of charging points)
•£69,100/year cost saving (difference between EV and current 
vehicle running costs)
Further assumptions and information can be found in Appendix 3. 
29292929Further tothereplacement ofdiesel vans and company cars with comparable electric vehicles (EVs), therollout ofelectric HGVs toreplace the diesel -fuelled
waste fleet should follow once this technology becomes readily available .Asthewaste fleet isresponsible forover 80%oftotal fleet emissions, this willhave a
significant impact ontheCouncil’s footprint once itbecomes feasible .
Anumber ofHGV manufacturers have announced plans tolaunch electric HGVs ontothemarket in2020 orbeyond ;however, atpresent there appear tobe
limited options available totheCouncil .Also, many oftheELDC diesel -fuelled vehicles have recently been replaced .Therefore, itisrecommended that ELDC
consider e-HGVs orother zero carbon fuelled HGVs during thenext vehicle replacement cycle, rather than immediately .The council isopen toother forms oflow
orzero carbon transport that may bemore appropriate given theregion’s geography and technically feasible inthetimescales suggested, such ashydrogen fuel
cellvehicles, orbiofuels .
​Afulldetailed feasibility assessment should beconducted toascertain more accurate costs and savings before moving forward with these measures .
Furthermore, ELDC ispart ofLincolnshire Waste Partnership which islooking collectively atsustainable options todecarbonise thecounty’s waste fleet .
Waste fleet electrification carbon reduction opportunities (7)Section 3: Carbon reduction opportunities
Waste fleet electrification
•Replacement of diesel -fuelled HGVs with e -HGVs and installation 
of charging infrastructure
•1,097 tCO2e/year saving
•41% reduction in total Council footprint
Further assumptions and information can be found in Appendix 3. 
30303030Commuting and business travel carbon reduction opportunities (8)Section 3: Carbon reduction opportunities
The emissions associated with staff commuting and business travel on behalf of ELDC currently total 585 tCO2e, or ~22% of the Council’s footprint. The following 
opportunities should be considered to encourage a reduction in commuting and business travel associated emissions. These oppo rtunities largely revolve around 
reducing the total journeys and mileage being completed by Council employees. 
•The use of video -conferencing tools are a great way to cut down on face to face meetings. 
•Car sharing and encouragement of the use of active and public transport where possible should also be investigated. 
Ultimately ELDC will need to engage with its employees to understand better the practical implications of reducing its busine ss travel footprint. 
Remote working
 Video conferencing
 Car sharing incentives
Encourage use of public transport
 Employee engagement
31313131Rooftop Solar PV carbon reduction opportunities (9)Section 3: Carbon reduction opportunities
~19%ofELDC’s emissions areassociated with theCouncil’s electricity consumption .Identifying buildings such asschools and offices with significant areas
offlat, south facing roof space could lend itself well forthe installation ofroof mounted solar photovoltaic (PV) panels .Solar PVinstallation isan
economically ‘low regret’ measure ;with benefits including helping tomitigate this substantial source ofELDCs’ emissions, saving ELDC money byoffsetting
theneed topurchase peak time electricity from thegrid, utilising unused rooftop space aswell asinsulating thecouncil from unexpected future electricity
price fluctuations .The electricity generated can beused tomeet thebuilding’s own energy consumption requirements orfedback into theelectrical grid
viathegovernment’s Smart Export Guarantee (SEG) scheme .
Electricity production from solar PVmay notalways coincide with times ofelectricity demand .Energy storage systems areoften incorporated inparallel
with solar PVtohelp address this issue .Electricity generated from thesolar PVpanels canbestored forusewhen thesunisnotshining, orinorder tolimit
thepower exported tothegrid.Currently themost commonly used storage technologies arebatteries and water heating .Detailed feasibility studies will
need tobecarried outtoassess theeconomic viability ofthis carbon reduction opportunity .
Rooftop Solar PV
•ELDC’s 2018 electricity consumption was ~1635 MWh, which 
amounts to a daily usage of ~4.5MWh per day
•To fully meet ELDCs electricity demand, an area of approximately 
8,300m2would need to be covered with solar PV panels. This is 
approximately the area of 1.3 football pitches
• This would result in GHG emission savings of 463 tCO2e / year and 
electricity bill savings of £159264 / year
It should be noted that the UK electricity grid is already in the process of 
decarbonising, and ELDC’s electricity emissions will steadily fall as this proceeds. Further assumptions and information can be found in Appendix 3. 32323232District heating carbon reduction opportunities (10)Section 3: Carbon reduction opportunities
Heat networks have been identified asakey technology todecarbonise heat within the UK.
District heat networks connect heat sources with local homes and businesses through a
network ofpre-insulated pipes carrying hot water .The heat source isoften acombined heat
and power (CHP) plant, but other heat sources such aselectric heat pumps and waste heat
recovery are also used .Aswell asoffering the potential todecarbonise ELDCs natural gas
emissions, district heating also improves airquality, provides low-cost heating aswell asthe
ability toprovide flexibility tothelocal energy system byproviding large scale thermal energy
storage .
Itshould benoted that district heating projects have very high upfront capital costs .Capital
expenditure can account foraround 2/3oftheheat network’s total lifetime costs .These costs
relate tothe heat network infrastructure, aswell asthe energy centre where the heat is
generated .District heat projects also have long project development timeframes and require
long -term planning and alignment between investors, councils, and consumers .
Furthermore, district heating projects areoften much less viable inrural areas due tothelow
population density .District heat networks arebest suited forhigh -density urban areas, such as
city centres .The cost percustomer tobuild and runadistrict heat network inless dense areas
makes them less attractive, and therefore often economically unviable .However, this can be
overcome with low-temperature heat networks, and lower heat losses from rural dwellings
(through better building efficiency) .Estimating the precise heat demand profile ofanurban
area isnotstraightforward .Given thehigh costs associated with building theenergy centre and
heat network, theriskofunderutilising theheat network isabarrier todeployment .
Detailed feasibility studies will need tobecarried out toassess the viability ofthis carbon
reduction opportunity .
Executive summaryContents
Section 1: Council target
Section 2: Carbon footprint
Section 3: Carbon reduction opportunities
Section 4: Governance and engagement
Section 5: Monitoring and reporting
Appendices
34Section 4: Governance and EngagementSection 4: Governance and Engagement
Stakeholder engagement
Robust engagement with stakeholders from across the Council will be crucial for successful climate action 
implementation. The Council should explore innovative ways for the whole organisation to contribute 
towards achieving the targets of net zero by 2040, with a minimum emissions reduction of 45% by 2027. 
An effective engagement strategy needs to be drawn up that actively involves all Council departments, 
employees and councillors . Achieving the greatest possible input and buy -in will allow ELDC to work 
closely with all stakeholders to identify the areas of the Council to prioritise to reduce emissions. It will be 
important for the Council to remain transparent throughout all engagement activities, and to provide 
stakeholders with the opportunity to contribute towards the planned reduction activities that the Council 
intends to implement across its own estate. 
Developing a robust stakeholder engagement plan should build on previous engagement to:
•Develop an initial list of stakeholders from across the Council to engage on a continuous basis.
•Complete internal in -depth stakeholder mapping exercise to identify, map and prioritise key stakeholders from across (and, poten tially, external to) the 
Council organisation. This will ensure that key stakeholder needs are identified and understood, with the relevant resources bei ng targeted effectively.
•Develop and agree a communications/engagement strategy that clearly details the Council’s approach towards stakeholder engage men t, 
ensuring complete transparency.
•Develop the appropriate tools to plan and track all stakeholder interaction accurately and store stakeholder information.Executive summaryContents
Section 1: Council target
Section 2: Carbon footprint
Section 3: Carbon reduction opportunities
Section 4: Governance and engagement
Section 5: Monitoring and reporting
Appendices
3636Section 5: Monitoring and reporting
Once a carbon footprint has been measured and a target set, monitoring progress is an important part of 
implementation. Monitoring and reporting are essential activities that should be undertaken at least annually 
between the baseline year and target year, and beyond.
Monitoring
Collecting the data should be completed internally on a regular basis. This process should become streamlined as 
the necessary data sources and associated contacts/owners become familiar with the process and adopt best 
practice data management. The ‘Carbon Trust Footprint Calculator’ provides a tool to collect data and calculate an 
updated footprint (using updated emission factors where necessary). 
Not only does the footprint need to be monitored at least annually but progress with implementing carbon 
reduction opportunities should be actively monitored too, including implementation year, energy reduction and 
cost savings. In this way, successful projects can be reported in a quantitative as well as a qualitative way. This can 
help to drive momentum and support the securing of budget for future measures.
In addition to monitoring the footprint itself, the project team should continually monitor how local plans and 
policies will affect the Council’s footprint and affect the ability of the Council to reach its carbon reduction targets. 
This will help the team to identify other potential carbon reduction opportunities and ensure that any carbon 
reduction co -benefits of specific policies and actions can be delivered. 
Section 5: Monitoring and reporting
Executive summaryContents
Section 1: Council target
Section 2: Carbon footprint
Section 3: Carbon reduction opportunities
Section 4: Governance and engagement
Section 5: Monitoring and reporting
Appendices
3838Appendix 1: Excluded emission sourcesAppendices
Some emissions categories under the GHG Protocol are not relevant to a Council’s operations and have therefore been excluded from this footprint. 
In future, ELDC could consider expanding its footprint to include supply chain and other Scope 3 emissions, such as procured goods and services, and 
investments. This would require additional data and analysis.
Emission Source (Scope 3)
Capital goods Out of scope: Does not play a key role in the Council’s operations.
Purchased goods and services (contracts) Excluded from scope of this report
Franchises Out of scope: No franchises controlled by the Council
Investments Excluded from scope of this report
Downstream transportation and distribution Out of scope: No sold goods distributed by the Council
Processing of sold products Out of scope: Not applicable to the Council’s operations
Use of sold products Out of scope: Not applicable to the Council’s operations
End-of-life treatment of sold products Out of scope: Not applicable to the Council’s operations3939Appendix 1: Excluded Emission SourcesAppendices
It should be noted that two of the most significant scope 3 emission sources are not included within the footprint –Purchased g oods and services, and Leased 
buildings. These emission categories typically form between 60 -80% of an organisation’s entire scope 1, 2 and 3 footprint.
These emission categories were excluded for the reason that the council wishes to focus its efforts at the start to reducing their own operational carbon 
footprint, once the governance and procedures are set in place then the council will aim to include other scope 3 emissions s ources. This is a sensible stepped 
approach, and shows long term commitment to not only reducing their own emissions but also the emissions arising from goods, services and buildings that 
they have influence over. This reaffirms the Council’s commitment to be seen as leading the way in reducing the region’s carb on footprint.
‘Crafty carbon accounting’ could be used to outsource the council’s own operations to contractors and external suppliers, the refore no longer having to account 
the associated emissions as their own. Under the GHG protocol’s operational boundary setting, this is technically allowed. However, it should be made clear 
that this is not the Council’s intentions, and they wish to be transparent, open and progressive in the way they report their carbon footprint.
4040Appendix 2: General notesAppendices
Capital Costs ​
•The capital costs stated in this report are based on the application of technical principles and professional evaluation. The pr ofessional evaluations are based 
on information available and are conditioned by data limits, scope of work and time.
•Whenever possible, calculation of energy and economic savings has been performed. Approximate capital costs were estimated which can be used to derive 
simple financial payback.
•All suggested projects require verification and detailed assessment prior to proceeding with implementation.​
•It would be prudent to conduct detailed life cycle assessments, particularly for high capital value projects, factoring ina num ber of variables that are not 
included within this action plan, in order to derive more sophisticated metrics such as Net Present Value and Internal Rate o f Return for improved evaluation 
and prioritisation of business cases for intervention measures.
Decarbonising Heat
•The majority of decarbonisation pathways include the electrification of heat sources (e.g. replacement of gas boilers with elect rically -powered heat pumps).
•Heat pumps output at a lower temperature compared to gas boilers and their operation is therefore more sensitive to the energy e fficiency of the building.
•Before electrification is considered, a building’s fabric (notably air tightness, insulation, ventilation) should first be consi dered and upgraded where 
necessary to ensure that an appropriately sized heat pump can efficiently and effectively meet the heat demand of a building.
4141Appendix 3: Calculations and assumptionsAppendices
General assumptions/notes:
•All energy consumption figures rounded to nearest 50 kWh, cost figures to nearest £100, and emissions to nearest 1 tCO2e. 
•Fleet performance management savings assume that fuel consumption can be reduced by 5%. Driver training savings assume that f uelconsumption can be 
reduced by 7%. This does not include potential associated maintenance cost savings. 
•Fleet CAPEX assumes that vehicles will be leased on 4 -year cycles, and includes the cost of installing EV charging points. EV sa vings assume that a renewable 
electricity tariff is procured for supply to EV charging points until the grid fully decarbonises.
•Across most sites it is estimated that energy consumption can be reduced by between 1 and 5% through improved energy manageme nt practices and staff 
awareness/behaviour change. Percentage savings have been applied to each site based on the auditor’s assessment of current pr actices and the potential 
for improvement. 
•BEMS optimisation assumes a 15% energy saving can be achieved through improved control of HVAC systems. A cost of £10,000 has been applied to include 
purchase and installation of required equipment. 
•LED lighting savings have only been applied where we have reasonable confidence that current lighting is non -LED.
•Gas-fired boiler seasonal efficiencies have been applied where boiler model details have been provided. Where only the age of bo ilers is known a seasonal 
efficiency has been assumed based on age. 
4242•Across most Council office sites it is estimated that energy consumption can be reduced by between 1 and 5% through improved energy management 
practices and staff awareness/behaviour change. Percentage savings have been applied to each site based on the auditor’s asse ssment of current practices 
and the potential for improvement. 
•Existing energy consumption in this case relates to gas and electricity consumption only. 
•The figures below include Tedder Hall and Skegness Town Hall. 
•No capital cost has been applied as it is assumed that only internal resource will be required to implement this recommendati on.
•All energy consumption figures rounded to nearest 50 kWh, cost figures to nearest £100, and emissions to nearest 1 tCO2e. Appendix 3.1: Energy management calculationsAppendices
4343•Fleet performance management savings assume that fuel consumption can be reduced by 5%. Driver training savings assume that f uelconsumption can be 
reduced by 7%. This does not include potential associated maintenance cost savings. 
•No capital cost has been applied to Driver Performance Management as it is assumed that only internal resource will be requir ed to implement this 
recommendation. A capital cost of £200 per driver has been applied to the Driver Training recommendation, assuming one driver per fleet vehicle.
•All fuel consumption figures rounded to nearest 50 litres, cost figures to nearest £100, and emissions to nearest 1 tCO2e. Appendix 3.2: Fleet management calculationsAppendices
4444•Based on the staff travel information available it has been assumed that a 10% saving can be achieved in commuting and busine ss travel emissions. This 
could be achieved through a combination of ‘mileage management’ measures, including increased working from home, promoting co nference calling over 
in-person meetings, and car sharing where feasible. 
•All recorded commuting and business travel was via petrol or diesel car.
•As no business travel or expenses data was available no cost saving has been calculated for this recommendation, although it is understood that Council 
employees are able to claim back business travel costs.  
•All fuel consumption figures rounded to nearest 50 litres, cost figures to nearest £100, and emissions to nearest 1 tCO2e. Appendix 3.3: Commuting & business travel calculationsAppendices
4545•Heating, ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC) control optimisation assumes a 15% energy saving can be achieved through imp roved control of HVAC 
systems at Council office sites. A cost of £10,000 has been applied to include purchase and installation of required equipmen t. 
•It is understood that only Tedder Hall has a comprehensive Building Energy Management Control System (BEMS), with other Counc il offices having more 
basic, localised controls, leading to sub -optimal control of the various systems. 
•All energy consumption figures rounded to nearest 50 kWh, cost figures to nearest £100, and emissions to nearest 1 tCO2e. 
•A full detailed feasibility assessment should be conducted to ascertain more accurate costs and savings before moving forward with this measure. Appendix 3.4: HVAC control calculationsAppendices
4646•Based on the details of previously identified energy efficiency projects provided it is assumed that a 30% energy saving can be achieved through upgrades to 
the various fans and pumps in use at Council office sites and council -operated leisure facilities. A cost of £5,400 has been app lied based on the calculated 
savings and typical payback of this recommendation. 
•All energy consumption figures rounded to nearest 50 kWh, cost figures to nearest £100, and emissions to nearest 1 tCO2e. 
•A full detailed feasibility assessment should be conducted to ascertain more accurate costs and savings before moving forward with this measure. Appendix 3.5: Fan & pump calculationsAppendices
4747•Based on details provided of existing lighting it is assumed that savings of between 60 -80% can be achieved by replacing existin g internal and external 
lighting with LED. Promenade lighting is understood to be mainly high pressure sodium while public toilet and office lighting isa mix of high and low 
frequency T8 and T5 fluorescent lighting. All of these are less efficient and effective than LED lighting solutions available onthe market. 
•All energy consumption figures rounded to nearest 50 kWh, cost figures to nearest £100, and emissions to nearest 1 tCO2e. 
•A full detailed feasibility assessment should be conducted to ascertain more accurate costs and savings before moving forward with these measures. Appendix 3.6: LED lighting calculationsAppendices
4848Appendix 3.7: Fleet electrification calculationsAppendices
•CAPEX assumes that vehicles will be 
leased on 4 -year cycles, and includes the 
cost of installing EV charging points. EV 
savings assume that a renewable 
electricity tariff is procured for supply to 
EV charging points until the grid fully 
decarbonises.4949Appendix 3.8: Rooftop Solar PV calculationsAppendices
•Calculations were run using 250 W panels each occupying an area of ~1.6 m2 perpanel. ELDC was assumed to consume 100% of the electricity 
produced by the array.
•An energy storage system (e.g. a battery) has not been included in the calculation. Further consideration of a site’s actual demand profile 
should be made to access the suitability of an energy storage system to increase the utilisation of electricity generated.
•Losses due to shading, solar panel inclination, azimuth angle, reflection losses, inverter inefficiencies have not been inclu ded within the 
calculation
Metric Value Unit Assumptions/Sources
2018 Electricity Consumption 1635000 kWh ELDC 2018 Electricity Carbon Footprint
Daily Electricity Consumption 4479.45 kWh
UK Sun Hours per day 4hrshttps://www.statista.com/statistics/322602/monthly -average -daily -sun-hours -in-the-united -kingdom -
uk/#:~:text=The%20average%20annual%20number%20of,to%204.7%20hours%20in%202018.
Solar panel nominal power 0.25 kW Assuming each panel is rated at 250W peak power
Energy produced per day per panel 1kWh Energy = Power x Time
Area of solar panel 1.85 m2https://www.pvfitcalculator.energysavingtrust.org.uk/Documents/150224_SolarEnergy_Calculator_Sizing_Guide_
v1.pdf
Total solar panel area required to meet 
daily electricity consumption of ELDC 8,286.98 m2Whilst reasonable steps have been taken to ensure that the information contained within this publication is correct, the auth ors, the 
Carbon Trust, its agents, contractors and sub -contractors give no warranty and make no representation as to its accuracy and acc ept 
no liability for any errors or omissions. All trademarks, service marks and logos in this publication, and copyright in it, a re the property 
of the Carbon Trust (or its licensors). Nothing in this publication shall be construed as granting any licence or right to us e or reproduce 
any of the trademarks, services marks, logos, copyright or any proprietary information in any way without the Carbon Trust’s prior 
written permission. The Carbon Trust enforces infringements of its intellectual property rights to the full extent permitted by law.
The Carbon Trust is a company limited by guarantee and registered in England and Wales under company number 4190230 with its 
registered office at 4th Floor Dorset House, Stamford Street, London SE1 9NT.
Published in the UK: 2020.
© The Carbon Trust 2020. All rights reserved. 