 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REPORT TO:  Cabinet  
  
MEETING DATE:  19 January 2021  
 
BY: Executive Director  of Place  
 
SUBJECT:  Climate Change Strategy Annual Update  
  
 
 
1 PURPOSE  
1.1 The purpose of this report is  to provide the first  annual update to Cabinet 
on progress with delivering the actions and commitments in  East Lothian 
Council ’s Climate Change Strategy 2020– 2025.  
 
2 RECOMMENDATIONS  
2.1 Cabinet is recommended to note the progress which has been made this 
year across Council Service Areas to tackle the Climate Emergency locally 
and deliver actions in the East Lothian Council  Climate Change Strategy 
2020– 2025 , despite the significant challenges of COVID -19. 
2.2 Cabinet is recommended to approve the updates to the Clima te Change 
Strategy Action Plan, which are set out in Appendix 2 to this  report.  
2.3 Cabinet is recommended to note the Key Achievements and Key Risks set 
out in this report, and the engagement with young people in East Lothian 
schools  to gather their views  and feedback on the C limate Change 
Strategy . 
2.4 Cabinet is recommended to approve the policy intention for an East 
Lothian Climate Forest, as set out in paragraph 3.20.  
 
3 BACKGROUND  
3.1 East Lothian Council’s Climate Change Strategy 2020 –2025 was 
approved by Cabinet in January 2020. Cabinet also approved the 
commitments to review and update the Strategy annually as further 
national legislative and policy changes occur, to review and update the 
Action Plan annually, and to seek approval from Cabinet for these 
revisions and updates on an annual basis.  
 
 
3.2 In addition to the commitments set out in the Climate Change Strategy, the 
Council also has statutory Public Bodies’ Climate Change Duties as set 
out in the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009:  to contribute to the delivery 
of carbon emissions reduction targets, to help deliver climate adaptation, 
and to act sustainably.  We report on these annually to the Scottish 
Government; our most recent Climate Change Report is detailed in a 
Members ’ Library Service report1 (December 2020).  
 
Context : the COVID -19 Pandemic and the Climate Emergency  
3.3 2020 has been a hugely challenging year . The COVID -19 pandemic has 
thrown into sharp relief our reliance on global networks and our 
relationship with nature. O fficers have continued to drive forward change, 
deliver actions to tackle the Climate Emergency locally and to reduce the 
Council’s emissions, despite the challenges of COVID.  
 
3.4 COVID -19 has impacted on us all, and has changed the way we work 
across Council Services . The pandemic has proven the concept that many  
Council  staff can work remotely and services can be delivered with fewer 
assets. The Council is now considering how to build on this learning . The 
‘Working Differently Short -Life Working Group ’, established as part of the 
pandemic response, identified carbon footprint reduction and improved 
sustainability as beneficial outcomes that have arisen due to COVID : in 
particular the shift to homeworking and flexible mobile working reducing 
travel related emissions; t he shift to digital and online working; and online 
processes replacing paper based processes, reducing the need to print.  
 
3.5 Results of a survey of pupils  from several East Lothian Council primary 
and secondary schools  (Nov –Dec 2020)  showed that young people from 
all schools which  responded thought pupils at their school had changed 
behaviours during  the COVID -19 pandemic, which could also benefit the 
environment and climate . For example, from 204 pupils who responded, 
47% thought pupi ls from their school had walked to school more often, and 
53% thought pupils from their school had shopped in local shops close to 
where they live more often, during the COVID pandemic.  
 
3.6 Globally, there are  calls for a ‘Green Recovery’ from COVID which will also 
tackle the Climate Emergency. East Lothian Council ’s COVID- 19 
Recovery and Renewal Framework sets out the key principle of a 
“sustainable and Green Recovery providing the opportunity to ‘build back 
better’”, and Climate Change is a consideration in the report.   
 
National policy update  
3.7 The Scottish Government’s Climate Change Plan update  setting out their 
policies  and procedures for reaching Net Zero, initially expected in April 
2020, was delayed due to COVID and was very recently published on the 
16th of December 20202. The updated Plan has a focus on a Green 
                                            
1 https://www.eastlothian.gov.uk/meetings/meeting/16707/members_library_service  (Report 138/20)  
2 https://www.gov.scot/publications/securing- green -recovery -path -net-zero -update -climate -change -
plan-20182032/?mc_cid=862fa4b269&mc_eid=9dfd1488b6    
Recovery from COVID  and sets out the route- map (updated to the period 
2032) to achieving net zero by 2045. This (interim) Climate Change Plan 
update came about as a result of the new and more ambitious emissions 
reduction target s set by the Climate Change (Emissions Reduction 
Targets) (Scotland) Act 2019 . The updated Plan states that  the completion 
of the  next full statutory Climate Change P lan is anticipated by early 2025.  
 
  Council  Officers will reflect on the considerable detail of the n ational 
Climate Change Plan update and consider the implications  for our own 
Strategy and Action Plan. Any material implications will be reported to 
Cabinet in due course.  
 
Key Achievements in tackling climate change  
3.8 The approval of the Council’s Climate Change Strategy was timely in a 
national context, and has been referenced in internal policies and by 
external organisations over the course of this year.  The Council’s Climate 
Change Planning and Monitoring Group, which consists of Heads of 
Service, Service Managers and Officers from across the Council, 
continues to meet to coordinate and drive forward action to reduce 
emissions and tackle climate change across Council Service Areas.   
 
3.9 The Association for Public Service Excellence (APSE Energy) asked the  
Council’s Climate Change Officer to give a presentation on East Lothian 
Council ’s Climate Change Strategy  at their UK -wide online webinar event 
on Climate Emergency Action Plans in June 2020,  as an example of 
councils  which  have “ambitious plans and look at the role of officers at the 
corporate centre when managing such plans ”. 
 
3.10 ‘Sustain’ (‘the alliance for better food and farming’ ) publicised a preview 
report  (Nov 2020)  of their findings from reviewing  the climate emergency 
plans of 92 councils across the UK, and recognised East Lothian Council’s 
climate action plan as one of only 13 across the UK  (the only Scottish 
council)  which “includes policies to tackle food emissions at a scale 
needed” t o tackle the Climate Emergency, and “ have shown that they can 
take significant action on food and the climate and nature emergency in a 
way that meets local needs, empowers citizens, and creates nature -rich 
green spaces ”. 
 
3.11 We continue to liaise  at national level with the Scottish Government, 
national agencies and organisations,  and with our partners in the East 
Lothian Partnership; and we continue to engage with young people 
through the East Lothian Youth Council and our schools, and with our 
partners  and local organisations to support actions to tackle climate 
change locally.  Significant work to tackle climate change continues in our 
communities, despite  the COVID pandemic, such as the work of 
Sustaining Dunbar, Dunbar & East Linton Area Partnership and other 
partners in developing a ‘Local Good Food Alliance’; and Sustaining 
Musselburgh’s work as a sub- group of Musselburgh Area Partnership to 
progress su stainable solutions for the Musselburgh area.  
  
3.12 We recently sought views on the Council’s Climate Change Strategy from 
children and young people at several  East Lothian Council primary and  
secondary schools (Nov –Dec 2020) . We received valuable feedback  from 
the young people, including suggestions and ideas for future focus, and 
comments on the strategy’s outcomes and its impact in the wider county, 
including the following  comments : 
• “I think this is good because climate change is a big problem that WE 
NEED to tackle and it’s good you’re doing something about it.” (P7 pupil, 
Longniddry Primary School);  
• “I agree with it all thank you for understanding what needs to be done and 
actually doing it. I think that's all great and please continue remember to 
make it really clear to people what you’re doing, why you’re doing it and 
how they can help.” (S4 pupil, North Berwick High School );  
• “I think this is a good plan and could help lower our environmental 
impact…” (S1 pupil, Dunbar Grammar School).  
 
3.13 The Counc il’s overall carbon footprint has continued to reduce, with the 
latest data from  our Climate Change Report 2019/20 showing a 29.5% 
overall reduction in the Council’s carbon footprint since our baseline year 
of 2014 /15, and a reduction of 2.5% from last year, to  14,630 tCO 2e, as 
reported in a Members ’ Library Service report3 (December 2020).  The 
Council is making good progress in respect of emissions reduction, year 
on year, despite significant population growth. However, this will need to 
be reviewed in the context of the growth agenda and whether a relative 
benchmark is more appropriate, with significant increases in the Council’s 
estate coming forward including new schools and community centres , and 
in the context of our ongoing asset review programme and opportunities 
around decarbonisation of energy sources.   
 
Our Climate Change Report 2019/20 also highlights other examples of 
best practice by the Council in relation to governance, management and 
strategy, climate adaptation and procurement.  
 
3.14 Updates on progress with the specific actions in the Climate Change 
Strategy Action Plan are set out in Appendix 1 of  this report.  
 
3.15 Key achievements in embedding tackling climate change throughout 
the Council since the approval of the Climate Change Strategy:  
• In September 2020 the Council launched and rolled out across all Council 
services a revised Integrated Impact Assessment (IIA) procedure, which  
now specifically includes the Council’s commitment to tackling climate 
change, embedding sustainabilit y, and embedding the principles of 
‘Climate Justice’ and ensuring a Just Transition to Net Zero;  
• The Council’s Sustainable Procurement Policy was approved by Cabinet 
in Nov ember  2020 , to ensure that goods and services are procured 
ethically and responsibly, from ethical and sustainable sources, including 
                                            
3 https://www.eastlothian.gov.uk/meetings/meeting/16707/members_library_service  (Report 138/20)   
through the supply chain and sub- contractors. The Policy was developed 
with input and feedback from Zero Waste Scotland through thei r capacity 
building mentoring programme undertaken by ProCirc, which supports 
public bodies to embed circular procurement and deliver circular economy 
and sustainable outcomes, with an emphasis on proactively supporting 
green recovery and delivering local benefits . Zero Waste Scotland intend  
highlighting East Lothian Council’s Sustainable Procurement Policy as a 
Case Study on their website;  
• Within the Council’s Corporate Risk Register there is now an updated 
‘Climate Emergency ’ Corporate Risk (as at May 2020). This risk lists all 
current and planned measures in order to make all our Council Services 
Net Zero Carbon as soon as reasonably practicable or in any case by 
2045, and to prepare for the impacts of climate change. This Corporate 
Risk continues to be l ive within the Corporate Risk Register and is updated 
regularl y; 
• The Council is part of Adaptation Scotland's Capability Framework 
Benchmarking Working Group, to benchmark, assess progress with and 
further embed Climate Adaptation across Council processes.  A 
preliminary Climate Adaptation Capability Assessment has been 
undertaken, and work continues to embed Climate Adaptation throughout 
Council policies and procedures.  
 
3.16 Highlights  of our Key Achievements  in tackling climate change this year : 
• ‘East Lothian Energy ’ affordable energy tariff for East Lothian residents  
was launched in August 2020, working with People’ s Energy Company . 
The electricity supplied is from 100% renewable sources.  By November 
2020 almost  300 people had signed up to East Lothian Energy and the 
tariff has created significant local and national interest;   
• We are progressing t he installation of solar PV on the Council’s housing 
stock for energy generation, and we have improved the energy efficiency 
of civic buildings across East Lot hian, including council offices, community 
centres and a swimming pool;  
• We are exploring opportunities for renewable energy generation in East 
Lothian with partners . A feasibility study by Zero Waste Scotland 
confirmed a solar farm is feasible for energy generation at Carberry former 
landfill site . The Council is a partner in the ParkPower project –  a national 
project identifying opportunities to generate Green Heat in Green Spaces . 
Consideration is being given to the potential to use bio- methane from food  
waste as an energy source following a positive high- level feasibility study;  
• The Council achieved t he Soil Association Scotland’ s ‘Food for Life Served 
Here’ Bronze Award again this year for the 7th year in a row, for its  
commitment to providing fresh, locally sourced and sus tainable food for 
school meals , and we are working towards a Silver award;  
• We undertook a consultation on our vision and overarching plans for our 
proposed ‘ ClimatEvolution Zone’, and we continue to explore options for 
Blindwells new t own and surrounding area  with partners, including the 
feasibility of minewater geothermal heat sources in our  former coalfields ;  
• Waste Services reported an increase in East Lothian’s household 
recycling rate to 55.3%  (2019)  of total household waste recycled;  
• We continue to report significant progress in increasing the Council’s 
Electric Vehicle (EV) fleet and installing public EV chargepoints across 
East Lothian. We added 11 new Ultra Low Emission Vehicles (ULEVs) to 
the Cou ncil’s fleet, funded by Transport Scotland’s Switched On Fleets 
Programme, increasing our current fleet to 28 EVs. The roll -out of EV 
chargepoints  across the county continues: w e now have at least one 
Journey (Rapid) charger in each of East Lothian’s  11 la rgest towns , and 
we have increased the  number of Destination chargers for residential use  
from 3 in 2017 to over 60;  
• We continue to take action to tackle future climate change impacts: a key 
area t he Council is advancing is Musselburgh Flood Protection Scheme ; 
we are currently progressing  Stage 4  of the Scheme ( Outline Design);  
• The Council’s  Design Standards for New Housing Areas Supplementary 
Planning Guidance was adopted in June 2020. This document aims to 
improve housing design across the area, making more attractive, 
sustainable places for living , and includes  climate change mitigation an d 
adaptation measures.  
 
3.17 We also continue to work with our partners to implement measures across 
East Lothian to improve sustainability, and benefit local communities and 
the natural environment. These are detailed in Appendix 1 and include:  
• Installati on of East Lothian’s first public water refill tap by Scottish Water 
in North Berwick (Feb 2020); we are working with Scottish Water to identify 
other locations for public refill taps in East Lothian;  
• We worked with  locally -based environmental organisation ‘Fidra ’ to 
identify solutions for reducing and eliminating microplastic granule loss into 
the environment from our artificial sports pitches ;  
• We continue to undertake t ree planting  and other green network 
enhancements, and support local groups with tree planting. We engaged 
with new communities to identify areas to relax grass cutting to increase 
the biodiversity value of the area. Orchards are being progressed with 
community groups , including  at Lewisvale Park, Musselburgh, and in 
Prestonpans, with support from Amenity Services ; 
• ‘Bikeability ’ cycle training was completed by  200 children across six  East 
Lothian Hubs  (April –June 2020 ), and by 180 children attending Children’ s 
Lunch Clubs  in Tranent and Prestonpans (July –Aug 2020). Between April –
Aug 2020, 55  children learnt to cycle;  
• Whilst COVID has had a huge impact on our communities, we continue to 
support Area Partnerships’ Sustainability  and Active Travel  sub-groups to 
promote and deliver local sustainability actions and environmen tal 
improvements in th eir areas.  
 
3.18 Key Risks that have been identified to delivery of climate change actions : 
• The COVID -19 pandemic has impacted on work across the Council, 
causing delays  to some  projects  and work streams. Appendix 1 highlights  
which actions in the Climate Change Strategy with a target date of 2020 
are progressing and which have been impacted or delayed by COVID, but 
will continue to be progressed again in due course;  
• The delay to the publication of the Scottish Government’s Clim ate Change 
Plan update, and lack of clarity in resulting guidance to local authorities, 
have delayed the Council in progressing interim targets towards reaching 
Net Zero;  
• Uncertainty over the Scottish Government’s Deposit Return Scheme has 
delayed moving t o a Charter aligned kerbside collection model and means 
we will be unlikely to achieve the national recycling target of 60% by 2020;  
however t he kerbside contract (under evaluation) once awarded  will uplift 
our waste performance significantly.  
 
3.19 In line with our commitments to review and update the Climate Change 
Strategy and Action Plan annually , Appendix 2 sets out proposed updates 
and amendments to the Action Plan for approval , specifically:  
• The addition of a new action (action 4.1h) to c ontinu e to reduce the Carbon 
Impact of household waste generated and managed for East Lothian – 
identified by Waste Services and based on SEPA national data;  
• The addition of a new action (action 1.5c) to reduce the Council’s paper 
use (for printing) –  identified by the Council’s COVID- 19 Working 
Differently Short -Life Working Group as a benefit (improved sustainability) 
which has arisen due to our new ways of working due to COVID;  
• The addition of a new action (action 3.1j) to improve the knowledge and 
understandi ng of East Lothian’s private housing stock to help facilitate 
funding for energy efficiency measures –  identified by Housing Strategy & 
Development;  
• The addition of a new action (action 3.1k) to review and update the 
Council’s affordable housing specificat ion and design guide to ensure all 
future developments are low carbon and sustainable –  identified by 
Housing Strategy & Development;  
• The addition of a new action (action 3.2f) to ensure all new build affordable 
housing delivered directly by the Council is  as sustainable and low carbon 
as possible –  identified by Housing Strategy & Development;  
• Addition of a baseline for action 1.8b relating to engagement with Outdoor 
Learning in schools;  
• Slight amendment to the baseline of action 1.8c (Eco Schools) to clar ify 
that this refers to East Lothian Council  schools;  
• Slight a mendment to the wording of action 2.2h on cycle training for adults;  
• Deleting action 5.1e as this is an Economic Development Strategy action, 
not speci fically a Climate Change action;  
• Combining action 6.2e with action 6.2b on natural flood management;  
• Revisions to the 2020 target dates of the following actions due to COVID 
related impacts: 1.1b, 1.5a, 1.6b, 1.7b, 3.3a, 6.1m, 7.4a, 7.4b, 7.4c, 7.4g.   
  
3.20 Work is commencing to develop a proposal for an East Lothian Climate 
Forest, which would be delivered by an East Lothian Climate Forest 
Partnership with links to our communities. The proposal is to develop a 10 
year strategy that will aim to plant 2 million trees across East Lothian, to 
enable us to reach our target of a carbon neutral East Lothian and deliver 
biodiversity and green network benefits. Council Officers have had initial 
discussions to scope the proposal and will now seek to procure a delivery 
partner.  
 
3.21 In the coming year, there is renewed vigour to tackle the Climate 
Emergency, and to continue to respond to the challenges and also the 
opportunities that exist and that are emerging.  We continue to work with 
colleagues nationally across Scotland’s public sector through the 
Sustainable Scotland Network  (SSN), which aims to accelerate public 
sector action on climate change and sustainability  and share best practice  
on low carbon behaviours and innovation, and to develop regional 
collaborati on through the Edinburgh & South East Scotland City  Region  
Deal Sustainable Economy group and the Regional Growth Framework . 
We look ahead to the forthcoming United Nations’ COP26 Climate Summit 
in Glasgow in November 2021  and the huge global opportunity that this 
brings. At both a national level through SSN and a regional level through 
the City Region  Sustainable Economy group we are exploring 
opportunities in the lead up to  the COP26 Climate Summit .   
 
4 POLICY IMPLICATIONS  
4.1 There ar e a number of policy implications a rising from th is report that will 
be considered and incorporated in future  local and regional policy 
development work in due course.  
 
5  INTEGRATED  IMPACT ASSESSMENT  
5.1  The subject of this report has been through the Integrated Impact  
Assessment process and where negative impacts have been identified, 
mitigating actions have been put in place.  
 
6 RESOURCE IMPLICATIONS  
6.1 Financial – The key priority areas and measures t hat have allowed the 
Council t o address climate change mitigation and adaptation to date are 
embedded within service budgets currently , however , meeting the Net 
Zero target will become more and more challenging. It should be noted 
that Climate Change is a rapidly moving area of legislati ve and policy 
context and the Council must continue to work closely with the Scottish 
Government to shape and influence as well as respond to national 
ambitions to ensure that the necessary me asures , powers , and resources 
are in place to deliver N et Zero. 
6.2 Personnel – None    
6.3 Other – None   
 
7 BACKGROUND PAPERS  
7.1 East Lothian Council ’s Climate Change Strategy 2020– 2025  
https://www.eastlothian.gov.uk/downloads/file/29179/climate_change_str
ategy_2020- 2025   
7.2 Members’ Library Service report on East Lothian Council’s Public Sector 
Climate Change Reporting 2019/20 
https://www.eastlothian.gov.uk/meetings/meeting/16707/members_library
_service  (Report 138/20)  
7.3 Appendix 1: Climate Change Strategy Action Plan annual u pdate.  
7.4 Appendix 2: Amended actions in the Climate Change Strategy Action 
Plan, for approval.  
 
AUTHOR’S NAME  Jennifer Lothian  
DESIGNATION  Sustainable Energy & Climate Change Officer  
CONTACT INFO  email jlothian 1@eastlothian.gov.uk  
DATE  6 January 2021  
 Appendix 1 : Climate Change Strategy Action Plan annual update  
Key to ‘ Tracking of Progress with Actions ’:  
Green = action progressing / on track;  
Amber = progress with action still underway but slowed or delayed (e.g. due to COVID);  
Red = 2020 action not progressing / problem with delivery of action;  
No Colour = target date not 2020  
 
 
 Ref ActionRelevant 
Strategy / PlanLead Person / 
ServiceIndicator BaselineTarget (where 
applicable)Target 
dateUPDATE: AT DECEMBER 2020 NotesTracking of 
progress 
with actions
1.1aWork with all Council Service 
Areas and key partners 
including the Scottish 
Government to improve the 
integrity of our emissions data 
and reporting mechanisms, and 
reduce carbon emissions 
annually, to reach Net Zero by 
2045 at the latestClimate 
Change 
Strategy; ELC 
Climate 
Change 
ReportingChief Executive; 
CCPMG; partners 
including 
Scottish 
GovernmentAnnual Climate 
Change Reporting to 
the Scottish 
Government: East 
Lothian Council’s total 
annual corporate 
emissions44,034 tCO 2e in 
2007/08Continue to reduce 
carbon emissions 
annually to reach Net 
Zero as soon as 
possibleAnnually Ongoing. The Council's Climate Change Planning & 
Monitoring Group continues to drive this forward 
across council service areas. We continue to 
improve the integrity of our data and this year we 
have further improved our Fleet data.
In 2019/20, ELC’s total annual corporate emissions 
were: 14,630 tCO2e (a reduction of 67% since our 
baseline year).
1.1cAnnual reporting on East 
Lothian’s overall Per Capita 
Carbon Emissions, within the 
scope of local authoritiesClimate 
Change 
StrategySustainable 
Energy & 
Climate Change 
Officer (SECCO); 
CCPMGData published 
annually by the UK 
Government 
Department of Energy 
and Climate Change 
(tCO2e) for all UK local 
authority areasBaseline data 
5.2 tCO 2e 
(2016/17)Decreasing annual per 
capita carbon 
emissions Annually 5.1 tCO2e in 2018 (the most recent data available).Revise target date 
to 2021Outcomes 
under East 
Lothian Plan 
2017–2027Key targets within the 
Council PlanEmbed our aims to tackle the 
Climate Emergency and to 
achieve emission reductions 
within our Council Plan and 
Local Outcome Improvement 
Plan (East Lothian Plan)Council Plan; 
East Lothian 
PlanPolicy Team; 
Sustainable 
Energy & 
Climate Change 
Officer (SECCO)Council Plan and Local 
Outcome 
Improvement Plan 
(East Lothian Plan)
1.1b2020
COVID 
IMPACTOutcome 1: East Lothian Council will be a Net Zero and Sustainable Council
Key Priority Area 1: Leadership and Governance
Revised timescale for this is not yet known as it will 
depend on the length of time we are in the COVID 
emergency. We are unable to review the Plans until 
we know the full extent of the impact of COVID-19. 
The Strategic Needs Assessment is being revised (by 
end of 2020) and this will provide the basis for 
review of Council Plan and East Lothian Plan (Local 
Outcomes Improvement Plan). Ref ActionRelevant 
Strategy / PlanLead Person / 
ServiceIndicator BaselineTarget (where 
applicable)Target 
dateUPDATE: AT DECEMBER 2020 NotesTracking of 
progress 
with actions
1.1dStaff awareness and 
engagement: Reinstate the 
promotional campaign ‘CRAW’ 
(‘Conserve Resources at Work’), 
or similar, to raise awareness 
amongst staff – including 
promotional measures and 
publicity (articles and updates 
in staff newsletter ‘Inform’)Climate 
Change 
StrategyCCPMG Increased awareness 2020 / 
ongoingDue to the new ways of working due to COVID-19, 
with less staff working in offices, 'CRAW' has been 
put on hold / to be revised. However, work has 
continued with Corporate Communications on 
Climate Change and Sustainability messaging during 
the pandemic, including a staff survey in ELC staff 
newsletter 'Inform' (Sept 2020) asking staff about 
behaviour changes that have occurred since COVID, 
which may also help us to tackle the Climate 
Emergency; 568 responses received. Publicity 
undertaken during 'Climate Week 2020' including in 
'Inform'. The Working Differently Short-Life Working 
Group identified carbon footprint reduction and 
improved sustainability as beneficial outcomes that 
have arisen due to COVID.COVID 
IMPACT
1.1gWork with our partner 
organisations to encourage 
them to take urgent action to 
reduce their own carbon 
footprint; add this requirement 
to the terms and conditions 
associated with grants awarded 
by the Council, Area 
Partnerships, procurement 
contracts etc.Climate 
Change 
StrategyCCPMG 2020 / 
ongoingOngoing. Climate Change Officer attends East 
Lothian Partnership's Key Officers Group meetings 
and Governance Group meetings on occasion. ELC's 
Sustainable Procurement Policy approved (Nov 
2020) which sets out the principles of sustainability 
(including carbon emissions reduction) that will be 
expected of businesses/companies tendering for 
Council contracts. Planning Service commissioned a 
'ClimatEvolution' Strategy, with the assessment 
criteria including how the consultancy would 
consider climate change issues (reducing / 
offsetting greenhouse gas emissions; climate 
adaptation). Countryside Service requested that 
Event organisers submit their proposals for carbon 
footprint reduction / improving sustainability of the 
event when considering event applications.This was being explored with external providers 
including Keep Scotland Beautiful, however, this has 
now been impacted by COVID. However, there is a 
'Home Energy' E-learning module (produced by 
Home Energy Scotland) available on ELC's staff 
online training platform LearnPro for ELC staff to 
access.1.1eEnsure that training in carbon 
efficiency behaviours is 
provided to all new Council 
employees via the staff 
Induction process, to instill the 
low carbon culture of East 
Lothian CouncilStaff Induction 
processCorporate Policy 
& Improvement; 
Sustainable 
Energy & 
Climate Change 
Officer (SECCO)Introduction of 
Induction training in 
carbon efficiency 
behaviours for all new 
staffInduction training in 
carbon efficiency 
behaviours is in place
COVID 
IMPACT
COVID 
IMPACT2021
1.1fInclusion of a new mandatory e-
learning module on reducing 
your carbon footprint, for all 
Council employees; explore 
options to make this available 
to community / third sector 
organisations, via the wider e-
learning platformCorporate Policy 
& Improvement; 
Sustainable 
Energy & 
Climate Change 
Officer (SECCO)Production of e-
learning module on 
reducing your carbon 
footprint2021
E-learning module on 
reducing your carbon 
footprint in placeThis has been impacted by COVID. However, 
information on 'Tackling Climate Change and 
improving Sustainability' has been incorporated into 
the Chief Executive's Induction presentation for 
new staff. There is a 'Home Energy' E-learning 
module (produced by Home Energy Scotland) 
available on ELC's staff online training platform 
LearnPro. 
 
 Ref ActionRelevant 
Strategy / PlanLead Person / 
ServiceIndicator BaselineTarget (where 
applicable)Target 
dateUPDATE: AT DECEMBER 2020 NotesTracking of 
progress 
with actions
ACTION 
COMPLETEDThe revised Integrated Impact Assessment (IIA) has 
been published and is on ELC's Intranet for Service 
Managers to use. The IIA now incorporates the 
specific requirement to include consideration of 
Climate Change and the Environment when making 
decisions about proposed policies and projects.
Officers continue to liaise with the Scottish 
Government and other external partners to 
continue to focus specific funding, measures and 
resources to address the Climate Emergency locally. 
ELC responded to a Scottish Government 
consultation on the Role of Public Sector Bodies in 
Tackling Climate Change (Dec 2019). A Scottish 
Government representative attended ELC's Climate 
Change Planning & Monitoring Group meeting in 
October 2020 to discuss SG's Climate Change Plan 
Update and Green Recovery proposals. The 
Sustainable Transport Officers Group continues to 
work with partner organisations including Sustrans 
and SEStran to improve and expand active travel and 
sustainable transport networks. Planning Service 
aims to further focus the Local Development Plan on 
addressing climate change with the working 
assumption that new development should be able 
to conform with the Scottish Government targets for 
achieving net zero by 2045 and the interim target of 
75% emissions reduction by 2030. 1.2aProduce an updated Integrated 
Impact Assessment procedure 
that is in line with current 
policies on equalities, human 
rights, sustainability and 
climate change; including by 
introducing ‘Sustainability 
Tests; to embed equalities, 
sustainability and climate 
change mitigation into all 
Council policies and decision-
makingIntegrated 
Impact 
Assessment 
processCorporate Policy 
& Improvement; 
Sustainable 
Energy & 
Climate Change 
Officer (SECCO)Production of an 
updated Integrated 
Impact Assessment 
procedure; revised IIA 
process to be used for 
all Council policies 
and decision-makingKey Priority Area 2: Embedding Sustainability and ensuring a Just Transition
Key Priority Area 3: Funding and ResourcesThe current 
Integrated 
Impact 
AssessmentProduction and 
adoption of an 
updated Integrated 
Impact Assessment 
procedure and 
implementation into 
all Council policies 
and decision-making2020
Work with our partners 
including the Scottish 
Government to focus specific 
funding, measures and 
resources to address the 
Climate Emergency at local 
levelClimate 
Change 
StrategyCCPMG; Scottish 
Government 
(SG); partner 
organisationsSpecific funding, 
measures and 
resources to address 
the Climate 
Emergency at local 
levelN/A Dedicated funding, 
measures and 
resources to address 
the Climate 
Emergency at local 
levelAnnually
1.3a 
 
 
 
 
 Ref ActionRelevant 
Strategy / 
PlanLead Person / 
ServiceIndicator BaselineTarget (where 
applicable)Target 
dateUPDATE: AT DECEMBER 2020 NotesTracking of 
progress 
with actions
• The Wellwynd LED installation is complete and saving 
£3.6K PA (2.5 year payback)
• A Wellwynd solar PV project has been approved by the 
Energy Transformation Board and is awaiting approval for 
expenditure within the capital plan.  
• Penston House LED installation - the upper floor is 
complete, lower floor is progressing in stages.  Stores and 
car park will be considered as future phases.
• The use of electricity reduced by 1.8% and gas by 1.4% in 
2018/19, despite bringing a new school online
• Capital bids have been approved in the 2020/21 budget for 
lighting retrofits at Longniddry Community Centre/Library 
and Post Seton Community Centre and a programme of 
water meter size reductions.
• Consideration is being given to Kinwegar and John Muir 
House for future LED projects.
Further progress on energy efficiency projects has been 
hampered by COVID.  However the Penston PV installation 
is progressing and is hoped to be completed by the end of 
2020.
Ongoing projects include External Wall Insulated Render 
works to 72Nr council properties. Pending projects to be 
completed this f/y include External Wall Insulated Render 
works to 31Nr council houses and flats & Cavity Wall 
Insulation works to 44Nr council houses and flats. Another 
pending project to include re-roofing with integrated solar 
PV at 2-62 Floors Terrace, Dunbar - 7nr. detached 2 and 3-
storey blocks of flats.      1.4aAnnuallyKey Priority Area 4: Reduce Emissions across the Council’s Buildings and Services
COVID 
IMPACTGrid Electricity 
(generation): 
5846.4 tCO2e; 
Grid Electricity 
(transmission 
& distribution 
losses): 498.4 
tCO2e; Natural 
Gas: 5453.2 
tCO2e; 
LPG:121.3 
tCO2e; Gas Oil: 
340.6 tCO2e; 
Burning Oil 
(Kerosene): 
35.8 tCO2e; 
Water – 
Supply: 44.1 
tCO2e; Water – 
Treatment: 
90.7 tCO2eReview / manage each of the 
following aspects of ELC 
estate and operations to 
reduce emissions towards 
achieving Net Zero: energy 
efficiency, water, heatClimate 
Change 
Strategy; 
ELC Climate 
Change 
ReportingCCPMG – all 
relevant Service 
Areas; Scottish 
GovernmentEmissions 
reduction 
towards Net 
Zero for  
energy 
efficiency, 
water, heatReduce carbon 
emissions annually to 
reach Net Zero as 
soon as possible Ref ActionRelevant 
Strategy / 
PlanLead Person / 
ServiceIndicator BaselineTarget (where 
applicable)Target 
dateUPDATE: AT DECEMBER 2020 NotesTracking of 
progress with 
actions
• The Wellwynd LED installation is complete and saving £3.6K 
PA (2.5 year payback)
• A Wellwynd solar PV project has been approved by the 
Energy Transformation Board and is awaiting approval for 
expenditure within the capital plan.  
• Penston House LED installation - the upper floor is complete, 
lower floor is progressing in stages.  Stores and car park will be 
considered as future phases.
• The use of electricity reduced by 1.8% and gas by 1.4% in 
2018/19, despite bringing a new school online
• Capital bids have been approved in the 2020/21 budget for 
lighting retrofits at Longniddry Community Centre/Library and 
Post Seton Community Centre and a programme of water 
meter size reductions.
• Consideration is being given to Kinwegar and John Muir 
House for future LED projects.
Further progress on energy efficiency projects has been 
hampered by COVID.  However the Penston PV installation is 
progressing and is hoped to be completed by the end of 2020.
Ongoing projects include External Wall Insulated Render works 
to 72Nr council properties. Pending projects to be completed 
this f/y include External Wall Insulated Render works to 31Nr 
council houses and flats & Cavity Wall Insulation works to 44Nr 
council houses and flats. Another pending project to include re-
roofing with integrated solar PV at 2-62 Floors Terrace, Dunbar - 
7nr. detached 2 and 3-storey blocks of flats.      
The COVID-19 pandemic has proven the concept that many 
staff can work remotely and services can be delivered with 
fewer assets. The council is now considering how to build on 
this learning. An asset review project has delivered a set of 
proposals and a project manager has been recruited and the 
project is progressing well. Priorities include the creation of a 
Hub at Penston which will create space at John Muir House to 
hopefully house staff from Randall House.  
A Working Differently Short-Life Working Group was set up, 
which identified carbon footprint reduction and improved 
sustainability as beneficial outcomes that have arisen due to 
COVID; in particular the shift to homeworking and flexible 
mobile working reducing travel related emissions; the shift to 
digital and online working; online processes replacing paper 
based processes and reducing the need to print.
A new Homeworking Policy has been drafted and will go out 
for consultation over autumn 2020.Continue the programme of energy 
efficiency improvements and 
incorporation of low carbon 
technologies in Council owned 
buildings – aiming for carbon 
neutral buildingsCorporate 
Asset 
Management 
Plan; Climate 
Change 
StrategyProperty 
Maintenance; 
Engineering & 
Building Standards; 
CCPMGEnergy efficiency 
measures installed2020 / 
ongoing
COVID 
IMPACTEnergy efficiency 
measures installed in 
all Council buildings
1.4c2020 / 
ongoing1.4b
POSITIVE 
COVID 
IMPACTContinue our Asset Management 
and Transformation Programme of 
office review of operational assets 
and rationalisation, and the shift 
towards flexible, mobile working, 
and collaboration internally and 
externally, to reduce energy costs 
and reduce our carbon footprint. 
Maximise opportunities presented 
by digital transformation to 
accelerate  the shift towards more 
flexible, mobile working.Council 
Asset 
Strategy & 
Management 
Plan; New 
Ways of 
Working 
Policy; 
Workforce 
PlanStrategic Asset & 
Capital Plan 
Management; 
Transformation 
Teamproportion of staff 
undertaking flexible 
/ mobile workingIncreased asset office 
rationalisation as per 
Corporate Asset 
Management targets; 
Property Asset 
Strategy; increased 
proportion of staff 
undertaking flexible / 
mobile working; and 
increased sharing of 
assets internally and 
with external 
organisations Ref ActionRelevant 
Strategy / 
PlanLead Person / 
ServiceIndicator BaselineTarget (where 
applicable)Target 
dateUPDATE: AT DECEMBER 2020 NotesTracking of 
progress 
with actions
1.5aFacilities Management 
Services will aim to eliminate 
problematic or unnecessary 
single-use plastics by the end 
of 2020 as part of the UK 
Plastics PactUK Plastics 
Pact; 
Facilities 
Manageme
nt targetsFacilities 
Management 
ServiceElimination of 
specific  single-
use plasticsSpecific single-use 
plastics eliminated by 
end of 20202020 Due to impacts of COVID need to revise target date to the 
end of 2021, pending service needs and COVID. Due to 
COVID there has been an unfortunate increase in the use of 
single use plastics in 2020. School pupils are encouraged to 
bring refillable bottles from home however this is not 
always possible; there has been an increase in the use of 
disposables for school lunches. COVID related PPE cleaning 
materials, chemicals in bottles, hand sanitiser etc. have all 
added to the increased use.
When it is safe and practical to look at reducing single use 
plastics Facilities Management Service will take this 
forward.
The council remains committed to tackling 
unnecessary/problematic single-use plastics use.Revise 
target date 
to 2021
COVID 
IMPACT
1.5cReduction in ELC's paper use 
(printing) - 'going paperless'Working 
Differently 
benefitsCCPMG Reduction in 
printer paper 
order 
quantities73% reduction in 
paper2022 Reduction in paper quantity for printing seen during COVID 
due to new ways of workingNEW 
ACTION 
ADDEDAll council buildings have access to recycling for 
paper/card/glass/plastic/cans
The council is continuing to build a green transport fleet 
with the addition of 11 new Ultra Low Emission Vehicles 
(ULEVs), funded by Transport Scotland’s Switched On Fleets 
Programme. This increases the current fleet to 28 Electric 
Vehicles ranging from cars to small and large vans replacing 
older diesel models. The new vehicles include Nissan 
env200 panel vans for use by the Countryside Ranger 
Service, Amenity Services, Transport Services and Safer 
Communities, BMW i3 cars for pool use and a Renault 
Master EV for Library Services.
In addition, COVID has impacted on business mileage with 
many staff now working from home due to COVID. This has 
reduced the emissions associated with commuting travel to 
work, and the emissions associated with travel for business 
purposes. The shift to online working, virtual meetings, and 
digital processes has accentuated this. However comparable 
data will not be available until after the end of the 2020/21 
financial year.2020 / 
ongoing
Key Priority Area 6: Reduce Emissions across our Transport Fleet and Staff Travel
Business 
Mileage: 
Average Car - 
Unknown Fuel: 
345.9 tCO2e; 
Bus: 35.8 
tCO2e; Car - 
diesel: 24.2 
tCO2e; HGV - 
average all 
types & sizes: 
541.4 tCO2e; 
Van - Average 
(up to 3.5 
tonnes) Diesel: 
737.8 tCO2eKey Priority Area 5: Improve Resource Efficiency and Sustainability
1.6aReview / manage each of the 
following aspects of ELC 
estate and operations to 
reduce emissions towards 
achieving Net Zero: our 
Transport Fleet and Business 
Mileage Climate 
Change 
Strategy; 
ELC Climate 
Change 
ReportingCCPMG – all 
relevant Service 
Areas; Scottish 
GovernmentEmissions 
reduction 
towards Net 
Zero for 
Transport 
Fleet and 
Business 
MileageReduce carbon 
emissions annually to 
reach Net Zero as 
soon as possibleAnnually1.5bReduce ELC’s waste and 
review recycling options 
within Council buildings and 
provide new systems where 
requiredConserve 
Resources 
at Work 
(‘CRAW’)Waste Services; 
Facilities 
Management 
Service Ref ActionRelevant 
Strategy / 
PlanLead Person / 
ServiceIndicator BaselineTarget (where 
applicable)Target 
dateUPDATE: AT DECEMBER 2020 NotesTracking of 
progress 
with actions
1.6bImplement an Ultra-Low 
Emissions Vehicles (ULEV) 
strategy for our Council 
vehicle fleetULEV 
StrategyTransport 
ServicesULEV Strategy 
implementedULEV Strategy 
implemented2020 Due to impacts of COVID need to revise target date to the 
end of 2021, pending service needs and COVID. Work 
continues to develop a ULEV Strategy and we continue to 
expand our ULEV fleet (see 1.6a above).Revise 
target date 
to 2021COVID 
IMPACT
1.6dImplement a ‘Green Travel 
Plan’ for all Council staff, 
setting out the expectation, 
resources and infrastructure 
to implement modal shift in 
staff travel behaviour from 
driving single-occupancy 
private cars to sustainable 
travel options, including use 
of electric vehicle (EV) pool 
cars, car sharing, active travel, 
use of public transportLocal 
Transport 
Strategy 
(LTS)Roads Services Introduce a 
travel plan for 
all ELC staff 
(subject to 
constituencies 
of the service)Introduce a travel 
plan for all ELC staff2021 A draft Staff Travel Plan was produced following a staff 
travel survey in early March 2020, i.e. pre COVID. However 
COVID has impacted on this, with significant numbers of 
staff now working from home rather than in council offices, 
so the Travel Plan will need to be revisited once the full 
impacts of COVID, and post COVID new ways of working, on 
staff travel patterns are fully known. Proposal is currently to 
carry out next Staff Travel Survey in February 2022, with 
subsequent biennial surveys (subject to approval).COVID 
IMPACT
1.6eContinue the programme of 
installation of electric 
charging points for electric 
vehicles at all Council offices, 
depots and public buildingsLTS Roads Services Number of EV 
chargepoints 
installed at 
Council 
buildingsThe first EV 
chargepoint 
was installed 
in 2012Increased number of 
EV chargepoints 
installed at all Council 
buildings wherever 
possibleAnnual We have increased the number of EV chargepoints installed 
at all Council buildings to 17 and will be installing a further 9 
in the 2020/21 financial year.
1.6gDevelop electric bikes / i-bike 
options to reduce staff 
dependency on the car for 
shorter work journeysLTS Roads Services Numbers of 
electric bikes / 
i-bikes for 
Council staff 
useElectric bikes / i-bike 
options for staff use 
at all main Council 
offices2022 E-Bikes update: SESTRAN’s pilot project in Musselburgh and 
wider Spaces for People funded network will soon increase 
opportunities for staff. Exact details and timescales will 
hopefully be confirmed by Christmas 2020.(Not an 
action for 
Roads 
Services) COVID 
IMPACTCOVID has impacted the ability for staff to use pool cars this 
year - this has seen a reduction in use across all pool cars - 
following a period of operational suspension due to 
government guidelines. Numbers available remain the 
same with a safe return option now in place - longer term 
effect of home working may impact the ongoing viability of 
the program but this will be assessed.1.6fRoll out EV training for staff Fleet 
Manageme
nt; LTSTransport 
Services; Roads 
ServicesNumber of 
staff trained 
and using the 
Council’s EV 
pool fleetIncreased number of 
staff trained and using 
the Council’s EV pool 
fleetAnnual1.6cThe council is continuing to build a green transport fleet 
with the addition of 11 new Ultra Low Emission Vehicles 
(ULEVs), funded by Transport Scotland’s Switched On Fleets 
Programme. This increases the current fleet to 28 Electric 
Vehicles ranging from cars to small and large vans replacing 
older diesel models. The new vehicles include Nissan 
env200 panel vans for use by the Countryside Ranger 
Service, Amenity Services, Transport Services and Safer 
Communities, BMW i3 cars for pool use and a Renault 
Master EV for Library Services. Continue the development of 
ultra low emissions vehicles 
(ULEV) options across the 
Council, including utilisation 
of full electric vehicle (EV) 
and hybrid technology for 
pool cars and operational 
vehiclesULEV 
Strategy; 
Fleet 
Manageme
nt; LTSTransport 
Services; Roads 
ServicesNumbers of 
ULEV vehicles 
in Council 
FleetReplace the Council’s 
fleet with ULEV 
wherever feasible2020 / 
ongoing Ref ActionRelevant 
Strategy / 
PlanLead Person / 
ServiceIndicator BaselineTarget (where 
applicable)Target 
dateUPDATE: AT DECEMBER 2020 NotesTracking of 
progress with 
actions
1.6hWork to achieve Cycling 
Scotland’s Cycle Friendly 
Employer  statusLTS Roads Services Working 
towards Cycle 
Friendly 
Employer 
statusAchieve Cycle Friendly 
Employer  status2022 This is linked to a draft ELC Travel Plan currently on pause to 
be reassessed post COVID-19 and to take into account the 
changing travel arrangements by employees to their 'place 
of work'. The Cycle Friendly Employer status to be 
progressed independently with the awarding body Cycling 
Scotland in 2021 once COVID-19 restrictions are relaxed. COVID 
IMPACT
1.7aProduce and implement a 
revised and updated 
Sustainable Procurement 
Policy, to ensure that goods 
and services are procured 
ethically and responsibly, 
from ethical and sustainable 
sources, including through 
the supply chain and sub-
contractorsProcureme
nt policyProcurement 
TeamProduction of 
an updated 
Sustainable 
Procurement 
PolicyPrevious  
Sustainable 
Procurement 
Policy has not 
been fully 
implementedProduction, adoption 
and implementation 
of an updated 
Sustainable 
Procurement Policy2020 ELC's Sustainable Procurement Policy was approved by 
Cabinet in November 2020. The Policy was developed with 
input and feedback from Zero Waste Scotland through their 
capacity building mentoring programme undertaken by 
ProCirc, which supports public bodies to embed circular 
procurement and deliver circular economy and sustainable 
outcomes, with an emphasis on proactively supporting 
green recovery and delivering local benefits. It is now the 
intention to bring forward for approval guidance 
documents, specifically Sustainable Procurement Guidance 
and Procurement Community Benefits Strategy.
1.7bProduce and implement a 
new community benefits in 
procurement procedure, set 
out in an updated Community 
Benefits StrategyCommunity 
Benefits 
StrategyProcurement 
TeamProduction of 
an updated 
Community 
Benefits 
StrategyProduction, adoption 
and implementation 
of an updated 
Community Benefits 
Strategy2020 Following the approval of ELC's Sustainable Procurement 
Policy by Cabinet in November 2020, it is now the intention 
to bring forward for approval guidance documents, 
specifically Sustainable Procurement Guidance and 
Procurement Community Benefits Strategy. Work is ongoing 
to develop and produce these documents.Revise 
target date 
to 2021COVID 
IMPACT / 
ACTION 
PROGRESSING
Baseline 
added
COVID 
IMPACTEast Lothian Youth Council established and Tackling Climate 
Change is on the agenda. This has been impacted by COVID 
however work continues to engage young people with our 
Climate Change Strategy. 204 pupils from ELC primary and 
secondary schools responded to a survey on our Climate 
Change Strategy (Nov-Dec 2020).
There is now a greater emphasis in schools on learning 
outdoors as a response to COVID mitigations and many 
schools are linking this to the theme of sustainability in a 
cross curricular way (literacy / numeracy).Key Priority Area 7: Sustainable Procurement
Key Priority Area 8: Our Schools and Young People
1.8aSet up an East Lothian Young 
People’s Climate Change 
forum to ensure our young 
people’s voices are heard and 
to support and empower 
young people to take action 
in their communitiesEducation; 
Community 
Learning & 
Development; 
SECCOEast Lothian 
Young People’s 
Climate 
Change forumEast Lothian Young 
People’s Climate 
Change forum in placeBy end of 
2020
Engagement 
with Outdoor 
Learning 
within school 
day: Primary 
47% 
Secondary 
100% (not 
including P7 
camp)Climate Change 
Strategy objectives 
embedded into 
‘Learning for 
Sustainability’ 
element of school 
curriculum2020
1.8bEmbed the objectives of this 
Climate Change Strategy with 
the ‘Learning for 
Sustainability’ (LfS) agenda as 
part of Curriculum for 
Excellence (CfE).  LfS is 
delivered through outdoor 
learning, global citizenship 
and sustainable developmentLfS Vision 
2030 as part 
of  
Curriculum 
for 
ExcellenceEducation; 
Outdoor 
Learning; 
national 
education 
partnersClimate 
Change 
Strategy 
objectives 
embedded into 
‘Learning for 
Sustainability’ 
element of 
school 
curriculum Ref ActionRelevant 
Strategy / 
PlanLead Person / 
ServiceIndicator Baseline Target (where applicable)Target 
dateUPDATE: AT DECEMBER 2020 NotesTracking of 
progress 
with actions
Slight 
amendment 
to baseline 
to clarify 
'ELC' schools
Bikeability Aug 2019 - Feb 2020: Level 1: 6 schools 333 pupils; 
Level 2:  6 schools 359 pupils; Level 3: 1 school 5 pupils. 
Hub cycling  April - June 2020: 200 children across 6 East 
Lothian Hubs.  
Children's Lunch Clubs  Tranent / Prestonpans July-Aug 2020: 
108 children.   
April - Aug 2020:  55 children learnt to cycle.  Schools' engagement in the Eco-Schools programme is 
promoted and encouraged with awareness raising 
opportunities being highlighted throughout the school year 
as information becomes available.
All schools have access to recycling for 
paper/card/glass/plastic/cans.
In addition, we are aware that pupils at Yester Primary 
School had engaged with Wiseman Dairies and ELC to 
engage in a conversation about the ongoing use of plastic 
straws with school provided milk cartons. We believe that 
this is now being looked into by school milk providers as a 
sustainable way forward.
ELC achieved the Soil Association Scotland's 'Food for Life 
Served Here' Bronze Award again this year for the 7th year 
in a row, and we are working towards a Silver award. 
Facilities Management Service continues to review school 
menus.
AnnualAnnual
Number of 
pupils 
undertaking 
Bikeability 
training 2014/15: 
Level 1: 316; 
Level 2: 130; 
Level 3: 5.Increased uptake of 
Bikeability Scotland. [In 
2018/19: Level 1: 757 pupils; 
Level 2: 513 pupils; Level 3: 
6]. Increased uptake of 'Play 
on Pedals'
1.8gActive Travel to School 
campaign and promotion, 
including parking 
management around schools, 
and supporting modal shift 
from school buses to active 
travel wherever feasibleLTS; Area 
Partnership 
PlansRoll-out of temporary 20mph speed limits for all towns and 
most villages under the Spaces for People programme will 
make it feel safer to cycle and walk. Promotional materials 
to support this. A series of vox-pops were produced and 
promoted via social media and on ELC's website.1.8cSupport and expand the 'Eco-
Schools' programme in East 
Lothian schools – potentially 
with greater input from other 
agencies and organisations / a 
county wide programme to 
support schools and teachers 
with delivery of projectsCurriculum 
for 
ExcellenceEducation; ELC 
Countryside 
Ranger Service; 
external 
partners 
including Keep 
Scotland 
BeautifulLevels of 
participation in the 
'Eco-Schools' 
programme in East 
Lothian schools; 
eco-projects 
delivered in 
schoolsIn East Lothian 
currently 8 ELC 
schools have 
Green Flags 
(according to 
Keep Scotland 
Beautiful 
website)Increased levels of 
participation in the 'Eco-
Schools' programme in East 
Lothian schools; more Green 
Flag Awards; more eco-
projects delivered in schoolsAnnual
Facilities 
Management; 
EducationAchieving the 
Food for Life 
Served Here  award; 
food options 
available in school 
canteensFood for Life 
Served Here 
Bronze award 
has been 
achieved by ELC 
for past 6 yearsNo single-use plastic 
packaging in school 
canteens; increased 
quantities of recyclable 
materials across school 
catering services; recycling 
& food composting facilities 
in all schools
1.8fSupport schools to develop 
Bikeability Scotland training, 
to teach skills needed to cycle 
safely on roads, and ‘Play on 
Pedals’ (which aims to give all 
children the chance to learn 
to ride a pedal bike before 
they start Primary 1)LTS Education; 
Outdoor 
Learning; Roads 
Services; 
Connected 
Communities; 
partnersNumber of East 
Lothian pupils 
undertaking 
Bikeability 
Scotland Level 1, 2 
& 3 training, and 
‘Play on Pedals’1.8dImprove sustainability and 
recycling in schools including 
reduction / elimination of 
single-use plastic packaging, a 
greater selection of 
recyclable materials across 
school catering services, 
improved recycling & food 
composting facilities in 
schoolsFacilities 
Management; 
Education; 
Waste ServicesQuantities of 
single-use plastic 
packaging 
purchased; 
quantities of 
recyclable 
materials across 
school catering 
services; recycling 
& food composting 
facilities in schools
Achieve  Food for Life Served 
Here  Silver award; more 
plant-based food options 
are available in schools, 
including promoted ‘meat 
free’ days and vegan options
Roads Services; 
Transport 
Services; 
Sustrans; Area 
Partnerships; 
EducationNumber of pupils 
travelling to school 
by active travel 
modes (Sustrans 
Hands Up Scotland 
Survey data)Annual
72.8% of pupils 
travelling 
actively to 
school in 2018 
(Sustrans Hands 
Up Scotland 
Survey data)Increased number of pupils 
travelling to school by active 
travel modes (Sustrans 
Hands Up Scotland Survey 
data)Annual1.8eContinue to source local food 
and achieve the Soil 
Association’s Food for Life 
Served Here  award; and 
promote/ensure more plant-
based food options in 
schools, including ‘meat free’ 
days and vegan options Ref ActionRelevant 
Strategy / 
PlanLead Person / 
ServiceIndicator BaselineTarget (where 
applicable)Target 
dateUPDATE: AT DECEMBER 2020 NotesTracking of 
progress with 
actions
2023
All schools delivering on 
vision on LfS 2030. 
Measured through the 
EVOLVE offsite education 
reporting system. DofE 
engagement data. JMA 
engagement data. SQA 
awards.Annual
1.8iSupport and expand pupils’ 
engagement with and value of the 
local greenspace through Outdoor 
Learning as part of ‘Learning for 
Sustainability’ (LfS) within the 
Curriculum for Excellence including 
Award schemes (Duke of Edinburgh; 
John Muir Award; SQA secondary 
phase awards)Curriculum 
for 
ExcellenceEducation; Outdoor 
LearningLevels of 
participation in LfS 
agendaLfS Vision 2030 from 
Education Scotland 
measured through the 
EVOLVE offsite 
education reporting 
system; DofE 
engagement data; 
JMA engagement 
data; SQA awards
Key Priority Area 9: Climate Adaptation: A Resilient Council
1.9aImplement the Corporate Risk 
Register and Risk management 
Plans to Review the resilience of 
Council buildings and infrastructure 
networks to sustain and enhance 
the benefits and services providedCorporate 
Risk 
Register; 
Risk 
Management 
Plans; 
Corporate 
Asset 
Management 
PlanProtective Services; 
Risk Management; 
all relevant 
ServicesIncluded within Risk 
RegisterAnnualInvestigate and develop 
opportunities for business 
development training / 
apprenticeships for secondary 
pupils in the ‘circular economy’Economic 
Development; East 
Lothian Works; 
Education; external 
partnersDevelop a 
programme of 
business 
development 
training / 
apprenticeships for 
secondary pupils in 
the ‘circular 
economy’Programme of  business 
development training / 
apprenticeships in the 
‘circular economy’ is 
developed and rolled out 
to secondary schoolsEast Lothian 
Works added 
as an owner 
of this action
1.8hThe Kickstart scheme helps businesses in Scotland to attract, 
recruit, train and pay young people. It provides support for 
employers which is delivered locally by local authorities and 
their partners and is jointly funded by UK, Scottish and Local 
Government to create and sustain jobs for young people. 
Explore whether this scheme could be linked to the circular 
econcomy.  
There is now a greater emphasis in schools on learning 
outdoors as a response to COVID mitigations and many 
schools are linking this to the theme of sustainability in a 
cross curricular way (literacy / numeracy).
Within the Corporate Risk Register there is now an updated 
Corporate Risk (as at May 2020) which is now titled Climate 
Emergency as the Council declared a Climate Emergency in 
August 2019. This risk lists all current and planned measures 
in order to make all our Council Services Net Zero Carbon as 
soon as reasonably practicable or in any case by 2045, and to 
prepare for the impacts of climate change. This Corporate 
Risk continues to be live within the Council's Corporate Risk 
Register and is updated regularly by the Climate Change 
Officer.
Preparing for the impacts of climate change, including an 
increase in the frequency and severity of severe weather 
events, sea level change, and preparation of business 
continuity plans, are covered by other Risks identified 
within the Corporate Risk Register and Service Level Risk 
Registers.
ELC is part of Adaptation Scotland's Capability Framework 
Benchmarking Working Group, to benchmark, assess 
progress with and further embed Climate Adaptation across 
Council processes. A preliminary Climate Adaptation 
Capability Assessment has been undertaken, and work 
continues to embed Climate Adaptation throughout Council 
policies and procedures. Ref ActionRelevant 
Strategy / PlanLead Person / 
ServiceIndicator BaselineTarget (where 
applicable)Target 
dateUPDATE: AT DECEMBER 2020 NotesTracking of 
progress 
with actions
2.1bProgress feasibility studies for, 
and progress implementation of, 
Sustainable Transport Hubs in 
East LothianLTS Roads Services; 
partners including 
Transport Scotland 
and Energy Saving 
TrustFeasibility studies 
for Sustainable 
Transport Hubs 
progressingFeasibility studies 
for Sustainable 
Transport Hubs 
progressing; 
implementation of 
Hubs progressing2022 A pilot Sustainable Transport Hub ('Journey Hub') is being 
developed at the Brunton Hall in Musselburgh and will be 
implemented early in 2021.COVID 
IMPACTFunding from Transport Scotland has enabled investment in 
new bus shelters and new electronic bus information 
displays in 5 of our largest towns. Our high-profile bus 
promotional campaign has been curtailed due to COVID-19.
Fair and just transition: we have the highest % of “on-street 
households” “within catchment” of an EV charger in 
Scotland. Also trialling an innovative slimline bollard style 
EV charger that it is hoped will be suitable for residential on-
street locations within our High Quality Conservation Areas, 
bringing even more “on-street households” “within 
catchment”. In the interim, we have worked with 
Community Councils to develop a dense and resilient 
network of public chargers to support those “on-street 
households” not “within catchment” even in our smaller 
towns and villages. Also investigating smart metering and 
agile tariffs to allow residents the similar advantage to 
those with control of their own private off-street charging 
to control their own EV charging carbon footprint.
Our high-profile bus promotional campaign has been 
curtailed due to COVID-19. Area Partnerships have 
supported a range of 'active travel' initiatives and continue 
to prioritise this within thier Area Plans.
East Lothian on the Move branding has further developed 
and more widely used across literature and online. New 
webpages provide useful information on active and 
sustainable travel.2.1cWork in partnership with our 
communities to identify local 
travel and transport solutions and 
to ensure a fair and just transition 
to a carbon neutral East Lothian;  
explore options for shared 
community transport options, 
particularly for our rural 
communitiesRoads Services; 
Connected 
Communities; 
partners & 
stakeholders 
including Area 
Partnerships, 
Community 
Councils, Tenants 
& Residents 
AssociationsCommunity 
involvement in 
decision-making 
over local 
transport and 
travel solutionsTravel and 
transport actions 
in current Area 
Plansongoing
Roads Services; 
Transport Services;  
Connected 
Communities; Area 
Partnerships and 
other external 
partnersAwareness levels 
from Residents’ 
Survey; number of 
behaviour-change 
interventions 
producedCommunity 
approved travel & 
transport actions 
embedded in Area 
Plans and 
implementation 
programmes 
underwayKey Priority Area 1: Sustainable Transport
2.1aWork with partners and key 
stakeholders, including national 
transport agencies and local 
public transport providers (bus 
and rail transport), to implement 
the Local Transport Strategy, 
enhancing and better integrating 
public transport provision and 
connectivityLocal Transport 
Strategy (LTS); 
Local 
Development 
Plan (LDP); 
Developer 
Contributions 
FrameworkRoads Services; 
Transport Services; 
Planning Service; 
partners & 
stakeholdersAs per Local 
Transport Strategy 
(LTS)As per Local 
Transport Strategy 
(LTS)As per LTS  
ongoingOutcome 2: Active Travel and Sustainable Transport are used for everyday journeys, to drastically cut emissions from transport and improve air quality
Increased levels of 
awareness from 
Residents’ Survey; 
increased number 
of behaviour-
change 
interventions 
produced2020 / 
ongoingLTS; Area Plans
2.1dContinue the promotion of 
sustainable transport options in 
East Lothian, including via Area 
Partnerships, East Lothian On The 
Move, Traveline, smart 
technology and mobile / digital 
technologyLTS; Area 
Partnership 
Plans Ref ActionRelevant 
Strategy / 
PlanLead Person / 
ServiceIndicator BaselineTarget (where 
applicable)Target 
dateUPDATE: AT DECEMBER 2020 NotesTracking of 
progress with 
actions
2.1fElectric East Lothian: Continue 
the roll-out of new Electric 
Vehicle (EV) chargepoints 
around the county; improve 
management and maintenance 
of existing chargepointsElectric 
Vehicle 
chargepoint 
(EVCP) 
strategy; LTS; 
LDPRoads Services; 
Transport Scotland; 
Planning Service; 
partnersNumber of EV 
chargepoints 
installed and in 
good working 
orderThe first 
EVCP was 
installed in 
East Lothian 
in 2012• A Journey (Rapid) 
charger in each of 
our 12 largest 
towns; • An 
increasing number 
of on- and off-street 
destination chargers 
for residential use2023 We now have at least one Journey (Rapid) charger in 
each of our 11 largest towns.
In addition, we have an increasing number of on- and 
off-street destination chargers for residential use. We 
have gone from 3 Destination chargers in about 2017 to 
over 60.
2.1gElectric East Lothian: support 
the switch to Electric Vehicles 
(EVs) in East LothianElectric 
Vehicle 
chargepoint 
strategyRoads Services; key 
partners and 
stakeholdersThe number of 
electric vehicles 
registered, as a 
proportion of the 
total number of 
licensed vehicles 
in East Lothian0.07% EVs 
in 201515% switch to EVs by 
20232023 0.561% EVs at end of 2019. According to Department for Transport 
(DfT) and DVLA Table VEH0105 and 
VEH0132a figures show there were 
62,709 Licensed vehicles registered in 
East Lothian at the end of 2019, of which 
352 were identified as Ultra low 
emission vehicles (typically battery 
electric, plug-in hybrid electric and fuel 
cell electric vehicles). This equates to 
0.561% of all vehicles. 
DfT and DVLA allocate vehicles to a local 
authority according to the postcode of 
the registered keeper. This is the 
keeper's address for privately owned 
vehicles or the company's registered 
address for company owned vehicles. 
The address does not necessarily reflect 
where the vehicle is located. This is 
especially true for large fleets kept by 
companies involved with vehicle 
management, leasing or rentals. 
Significant changes in the number of 
vehicles from year to year can often 
occur when these companies change 
their registered address.COVID 
IMPACTThis is still a live action - requirement to focus on 
COVID response has prevented this being progressed 
during 2020. COVID position has impacted the work 
relating to community transport at present - with a 
national shift to reduce public transport use 
throughout the pandemic the options to explore 
community based transport have not been possible.2.1eExplore options for shared 
community transport options, 
particularly for our rural 
communitiesTransport Services; 
partners; 
Connected 
CommunitiesProposals for shared 
community 
transport options 
established.2022 Ref ActionRelevant 
Strategy / PlanLead Person / 
ServiceIndicator BaselineTarget (where 
applicable)Target 
dateUPDATE: AT DECEMBER 2020 NotesTracking of 
progress 
with actions
ACTION 
COMPLETED
COVID 
IMPACTNew Supplementary Planning Guidance makes EV 
infrastructure a material consideration for Planners, 
in addition to LDP Policy T31, and sets higher 
expectations of developers to provide chargepoints. 
Large housing developers now required to report on 
their EV charging proposals which will be reviewed 
for suitability by Road Services.
Roads Service will also be contributing to an OLEV/IET 
“Guide to EV Infrastructure for Local Authorities” 
which will hopefully become national guidance.
This area has been impacted by the COVID pandemic. 
Previously transportation for visitors between visitor 
attractions was to an extent serviced by the Lothian 
open top bus. Both Seabird Centre and John Muir 
Birthplace encourage public transport and offer 
discounts to entry/shop if arriving by using public 
transport. Many attractions are on the Scotrail 2for1 
campaign.
The 'Spaces for People' programme funded 
temporary measures to create space for social 
distancing in towns and to keep school communities 
safe, to support, encourage and give people space for 
walking and cycling during the COVID pandemic.
Sections of the Segregated Active Travel Corridor 
have already been implemented across East Lothian; 
and we continue to seek opportunities where 
possible to implement additional sections through 
funding opportunities or developer contributions.
Actions in the Active Travel Improvement Plan 
continue to be implemented. Ongoing collaboration 
with Sustrans, SEStran and other funding partners to 
improve and expand the cycle networks, identified in 
the LTS / ATIP and also through planning conditions 
attached to new housing developments. Current 
significant focus in the west of the county in and 
around Musselburgh where strategic cycle routes and 
connections are being developed. Improvements to 
the National Cycle Network in Dunbar and West Barns 
with further locations to be improved in 2021. A pilot 
transport Journey Hub has been identified to be 
located in Musselburgh with an aim to replicate these 
Journey Hubs in the other main East Lothian Towns. 
Ongoing input and consultations with the Local Area 
Partnerships / Community Councils and cycle 
community for these and other active travel projects.Number of Green 
Travel Plans for 
Staff produced for 
businesses / 
employers; 
number of staff 
travelling by active 
& sustainable 
modes
Implement the actions in the 
Active Travel Improvement 
Plan (ATIP) (Local Transport 
Strategy)LTS (ATIP); LDP; 
Developer 
Contributions 
FrameworkRoads Services; 
Planning Service; 
Outdoor Access; 
Area Partnerships; 
Sustrans; SEStran; 
other partnersAs per Active 
Travel 
Improvement Plan 
(LTS)EV Strategy and 
guidance
2.1iWork with businesses and 
other employment hubs to 
implement Green Travel Plans 
for staff, and work up a 
promotional campaign with 
rewards e.g. Sustrans’ Scottish 
Workplace Journey Challenge2.1hDevelop guidance for the 
specification and installation 
of EV chargepoints in new 
developments charging points 
(including for new flatted / 
communal parking in 
developments)EV chargepoint 
Strategy; LTS; 
LDP / 
Supplementary 
Planning 
Guidance
Roads Services; 
SECCO; partners; 
businessesImplementation of 
EV Strategy and 
guidance2021
Planning Service; 
Roads Services; 
developers; 
Sustrans; SEStranImplementation of 
Segregated Active 
Travel Corridor 
progressingSegregated Active 
Travel Corridor 
being implemented 
and being used2020 / 
ongoingRoads Services; 
Planning Service; 
partners
As per ATIP 
(LTS)As per ATIP (LTS) 2020 / 
ongoing
2.2bIncreasing number 
of Green Travel 
Plans for Staff 
produced for 
businesses/employ
ers; increasing 
number of staff 
travelling by active 
& sustainable 
modes2021
Key Priority Area 2: Active Travel
2.2aProgress implementation of 
the Segregated Active Travel 
CorridorLTS; LDP Ref ActionRelevant 
Strategy / 
PlanLead Person / Service Indicator BaselineTarget (where 
applicable)Target 
dateUPDATE: AT DECEMBER 2020 NotesTracking of 
progress 
with actions
COVID 
IMPACTRoads Services have responded to a number of Community 
Councils' requests for public EV chargepoints. 
Operational Examples:
Humbie Hub, Humbie
Rig Street, Aberlady
Village Hall, Garvald
Walden Place, Gifford
Bowling Club, Pencaitland
Saltcoats Road, Gullane
Funded Sites in the Delivery Pipeline for FY20/21:
Whitekirk
East Lothian on the Move branding has further developed and 
more widely used across literature and online. New webpages 
provide useful information on active and sustainable travel.2.2c
Increased levels of 
awareness from 
Residents’ Survey; 
increased number 
of behaviour-
change 
interventions 
produced
Outdoor Access; 
Countryside Service; 
Roads Services;  
Connected 
Communities; Area 
Partnerships; funding 
partners; East Lothian 
Local Access ForumCore Paths Audits 
data
2.2eImprove management and maintenance of 
walking routes and the Core Path Network, 
and continue to improve path surfaces to 
ensure access for all abilities, constructed 
for climate resilience (e.g. porous surfaces); 
ensure that our places encourage walking, 
with well-maintained streets, paths and 
public spaces that are fully accessible and fit 
for purpose; pedestrian priority; 
information on walking routes; walking / 
pedestrian infrastructureCore Paths 
Plan; LTS / 
ATIP
2.2fWork with partners to improve cycling route 
connectivity and safety, particularly to 
connect rural communities to larger 
settlements and/or public transport hubs 
and connectivity to local amenitiesLTS / ATIP; 
Area PlansProgressing 
implementation of 
connecting cycle 
routesImproved 
management and 
maintenance of 
Core Paths Network 
as per Core Paths 
Audits2020 / 
ongoingContinue the promotion of active travel 
options in East Lothian, including via Area 
Partnerships, East Lothian Cycle Forum, East 
Lothian On The Move, Traveline, smart 
technology and mobile / digital technology
Connecting cycle 
routes are being 
implemented and 
being usedRoads Services;  
Connected 
Communities; 
funding partners; East 
Lothian Cycle Forum2020 / 
ongoing2020 / 
ongoing
2.2dLTS; Area 
Partnership 
PlansRoads Services; 
Transport Services; 
Area Partnerships; 
East Lothian Cycle 
Forum; external 
partnersAwareness levels 
from Residents’ 
Survey; number of 
behaviour-change 
interventions 
produced2020 / 
ongoingCommunity 
initiated projects 
are incorporated 
into Area Plans and 
implementedRoads Services; 
Outdoor Access;  
Connected 
Communities; 
funding partners; 
Area Partnerships; 
community partners; 
East Lothian Cycle 
ForumCommunity 
initiated projects 
are incorporated 
into Area Plans and 
implementedWorking with partners, including the East 
Lothian Cycle Forum and Area Partnerships, 
support and encourage community initiated 
projects, including with funding and 
infrastructureLTS / ATIP; 
Area Plans
All work of Countryside Team significantly disrupted by COVID. 
Maintaining the path network was one of the priorities as paths 
were much more regularly used with communities encouraged to 
stay local.
‘Spaces for People’ funded temporary measures to create space 
for social distancing in towns and to keep school communities 
safe, to support, encourage and give people space for walking 
and cycling during the COVID pandemic.
Ongoing collaboration with Sustrans, SEStran and other funding 
partners to improve and expand the cycle networks, identified in 
the LTS / ATIP and also through planning conditions attached to 
new housing developments. Current significant focus in the west 
of the county in and around Musselburgh where strategic cycle 
routes and connections are being developed. Improvements to 
the National Cycle Network in Dunbar and West Barns with 
further locations to be improved in 2021. A pilot transport 
Journey Hub has been identified to be located in Musselburgh 
with an aim to replicate these Journey Hubs in the other main 
East Lothian Towns. Ongoing input and consultations with the 
Local Area Partnerships / Community Councils and cycle 
community for these and other active travel projects.
Using Spaces for People funding, temporary segregated 
cycleways will connect Musselburgh-Portobello and Cockenzie-
Prestonpans. If there is community support, these could become 
permanent.  Ref ActionRelevant 
Strategy / 
PlanLead Person / Service Indicator BaselineTarget (where 
applicable)Target 
dateUPDATE: AT DECEMBER 2020 NotesTracking of 
progress 
with actions
2.3aContinue to comply with Air Quality 
Objectives (AQO) and improve air 
quality in Musselburgh’s Air Quality 
Management Area (AQMA)Local Air 
Quality 
Management 
Progress 
ReportsProtective Services 
(Environmental 
Health – Air Quality); 
Planning Service; 
partnersLocal Air Quality 
Management – 
Annual Progress 
Reporting:  Air 
Quality ObjectivesAQOs were 
exceeded in 
2013; this is 
when an AQMA 
was declaredComply with all Air 
Quality Objectives 
(AQO); no 
exceedances of any 
objectives2020 / 
ongoingAir Quality monitoring results from 2019 confirms there 
were no exceedances of any Air Quality Objective (AQO) 
during 2019, including within the AQMA, with the last 
exceedance being recorded in 2016.
East Lothian Council have engaged consultants to carry out 
a Detailed Assessment of Air Quality in Musselburgh and 
the results will be available autumn/winter 2020. If the 
Detailed Assessment concludes future exceedances of the 
AQO will be unlikely, even with anticipated future 
developments, then East Lothian Council will revoke the 
AQMA in 2021.
2.3bInvestigate collaborative working with 
City of Edinburgh Council to identify 
solutions to tackle traffic congestion 
and air quality in MusselburghRoads Services Progression of 
collaborative 
solutions for 
Musselburgh with 
City of Edinburgh 
CouncilProgression of 
collaborative 
solutions for 
Musselburgh with 
City of Edinburgh 
Councilongoing Currently working with City of Edinburgh Council (CEC) to 
deliver a temporary cycle link between Portobello and 
Musselburgh through Spaces for People programme - 
installation scheduled for spring 2021.  Potential to make 
this permanent through the Musselburgh Active Toun 
project.  Working with CEC to improve bus journey times 
between the ELC and CEC areas through the Transport 
Transition programme. Particular points of congestion 
identified in Musselburgh and Prestonpans.
2.3dExplore innovative technological 
solutions to improve urban Air Quality, 
including the latest version of the 
CityTree installation for MusselburghLocal Air 
Quality 
Management 
Progress 
ReportsProtective Services 
(Environmental 
Health – Air Quality); 
partnersExplore ideas for 
innovative 
technical solutions 
to improve urban 
Air QualityPhase 1 CityTree 
pilot project ran 
in 2018/19 in 
Musselburgh’s 
AQMADevelopment of 
innovative technical 
solutions to 
improve urban Air 
Quality2025 East Lothian Council commissioned a City Tree within the 
AQMA in Musselburgh during late Summer of 2018. As well 
as providing the locus for the CityTree, the structure also 
contains signage and information on Air Quality. The 
CityTree had to be removed in Autumn 2019 due to 
problems with the irrigation system.Amended 
action to 
delete 
"Bikeability" 
and replace 
with "adult 
cycle 
training".
No action to report this year as this has been impacted by 
COVID, although actions will be picked up again and this 
will be ongoing.COVID 
IMPACTOutdoor Learning; 
Roads Services2.2gElectric bike hubs 
and bicycle hire 
hubs established; e-
bike usage is 
increasing
Support Bikeability  adult  cycle training 
for adults throughout the county2022 Roll out electric bike and public bicycle 
hire hubs with associated infrastructure 
in partnership with communities / Area 
PartnershipsLTS Roads Services;  
Connected 
Communities; APs; 
partnersBike hubs 
established; e-bike 
usage
Number of 
Bikeability  adult 
cycle  training 
sessions for adults 
and number of 
participantsNone at present Increased numbers 
of Bikeability 
training sessions 
and participants2023
Key Priority Area 3: Improving Air Quality
2.3cReduce exposure to poor air quality 
through urban placemaking, including 
appropriate green network solutions 
such as hedges / use of landscaping to 
buffer emitting developmentPlanning Service; 
Protective Services; 
Connected 
Communities; 
partnersPlacemaking and 
urban planning of 
green solutionsThe Council has 
already planted 
hundreds of 
urban treesIncrease green 
solutions as barriers 
/ buffers to air 
pollutionongoing2.2hE-Bikes update: SESTRAN’s pilot project in Musselburgh 
and the Spaces for People funded network of six additional 
stations will be installed by March 2020.
Essential Cycling Skills: Instructors available through 
Outdoor Learning. Ref ActionRelevant 
Strategy / 
PlanLead Person / Service Indicator BaselineTarget (where 
applicable)Target 
dateUPDATE: AT DECEMBER 2020 NotesTracking of 
progress 
with actions
2.3eExpand Air Quality awareness-raising 
campaign to end idling of vehicles; 
including promoting health and wellbeing 
implications of cleaner airAir Quality 
ManagementProtective Services; 
East Central Scotland 
Vehicle Emissions 
Partnership; partners; 
communitiesAir Quality 
awareness-
raising 
campaign 
producedAir Quality 
awareness-
raising campaign 
produced and 
rolled out; 
monitoring 
underwayongoing The partnership has secured funding to continue through 2020/21 and was 
expanded further when Stirling Council became a partner authority in 2019.
Climate Change considered in Flood Studies and Schemes identified in Local 
Flood Risk Management Plan. Corporate Risk Register updated.
The Council is continuing to explore opportunities to improve the energy 
efficiency of existing stock across all domestic tenures through measures 
such as external wall insulation, cavity wall insulation and is exploring 
possibility of under floor insulation as well as internal wall insulation. 
The Council has also signed up to a ParkPower project which will identify 
potential areas across East Lothian that would be suitable for ground source 
heating on a scale that would provide energy to a number of surrounding 
domestic and non domestic properties. Report is due end of March 2021. 
Further projects to look at geothermal possibilities are also being explored.
East Lothian Council was allocated £834k of funding from the Scottish 
Government to deliver energy efficiency measures to those identified as 
being in fuel poverty who had suitable construction types. Although COVID 
had a massive impact on the delivery of this programme with the 
construction sector being closed down between March and July  2020, the 
Council still managed to maximise this fund delivering insulation measures 
to over 155 private properties across East Lothian. The Scottish Government 
has allocated a further £937k to help deliver efficiency measures for the 
2020/21 programme. Properties have been identified and the contract has 
just recently been awarded with site starts expected in January 2021. This 
work is complemented with similar measures to Council properties within 
the same areas to maximise efficiencies. 
Property Maintenance service continues to meet with Strategy and 
Development colleagues on a monthly basis to discuss existing and new 
funding streams and opportunities.
The Council also maximises opportunities to meet the Scottish 
Government's Greener Standard which attracts additional funding of £2,000/ 
house for all new build developments.Key Priority Area 4: Climate Adaptation: Resilient Transport Networks and Infrastructure
2.4aLTS; Road 
Asset 
Management 
Plan,  
Corporate 
Risk Register, 
Risk 
Management 
PlansRoad Services; 
Structures & Flooding 
Team; national & local 
partners
3.1aContinue to improve the energy 
efficiency of East Lothian’s existing 
buildings, exploring options for low 
carbon and renewable heat and energy 
sources to meet the targets set out in the 
Energy Efficiency Scotland Programme to 
make Scotland’s existing buildings near 
zero carbon wherever feasible.LHEES; Local 
Housing 
Strategy 
(LHS); Asset 
ManagementStrategy & 
Development; 
Projects Team; 
Scottish GovernmentReduced Energy 
Consumption
Number of 
measures 
installedIncreased 
number of energy 
efficiency 
measures 
installedAnnualImplement the Road Asset Management 
Plan, Corporate Risk Register and Risk 
Management Plans, to ensure the road, 
rail and active travel network 
infrastructure, including coastal 
protection for coastal transport 
infrastructure, is future-proofed to 
withstand extreme weather events / tidal 
surges and future changes to the climate; 
ensure paths are constructed for climate 
resilience (e.g. porous surfaces); continue 
to monitor and review
Key Priority Area 1: Energy Efficient Homes and Buildings
3.1bMaximise funding opportunities for 
energy efficiency measures across all 
housing tenures in East Lothian and 
continue to complete fabric 
improvements to domestic Council and 
private stockStrategy & 
Development; 
Housing Team; 
Property 
Maintenance 
ongoing
Outcome 3: Net Zero, Energy Efficient Homes and Buildings that are adapted for a changing climate
LHEES; Local 
Housing 
Strategy (LHS)Annual Ref ActionRelevant 
Strategy / 
PlanLead Person / Service Indicator BaselineTarget (where 
applicable)Target 
dateUPDATE: AT DECEMBER 2020 NotesTracking of 
progress 
with actions
3.1dImprove knowledge and understanding of 
Council housing stock, i.e. condition, fuel 
poverty, energy efficiencyProperty 
MaintenanceNumber of 
Council housing 
assets with full 
stock condition 
intelligenceAll assets to be 
physically 
surveyed on a 5-
year rolling 
programmeAnnual A 5-year rolling survey programme assessing stock condition, energy 
efficiency & housing quality commenced in January 2020, however was 
halted due to the ongoing COVID pandemic. The programme recommenced 
on 31 August 2020.COVID 
IMPACT
3.1eContinuing to meet the Scottish Housing 
Quality Standard (SHQS) while also 
meeting Scotland’s Energy Efficiency 
Standards for Social Housing (EESSH) is a 
priority for all social landlords. Widen the 
range of technologies under 
consideration to allow compliance with 
the EESH2 standard by 2032Property 
Maintenance% of housing 
stock compliant 
with the SHQS / 
EESSHAnnual 
return of 
the Social 
Housing 
Charter 
(ARC)SHQS - ongoing. 
EESSH - 
December 2020.2020 / 
ongoingEESSH compliance has increased by 24.31% year-on-year. At 09/11/2020 
EESSH compliance was 85.11% 
3.1iContinue to explore opportunities for 
new innovative energy efficiency 
workstreams through the Energy 
Transformation BoardEnergy 
Transformation BoardOngoing • Opportunities have been considered with Scottish Water Horizons, AMP 
Clean Energy and Heriot-Watt University (ongoing).
• A PPA (power purchase agreement) offer from Community Windpower 
was considered but found to be overall more expensive and more risky than 
the agreed national contract.
• This work continues and now includes ELC being a core partner in a 'Green 
Heat in Green Spaces' and opportunities to generate and use biomethane.COVID 
IMPACT
COVID 
IMPACT
ACTION 
COMPLETEDNo homes could be visited this year due to COVID pandemic, however 240 
households were supported/engaged with energy advice.
Free training opportunities have been secured in January 2021 for Council 
staff.
Ongoing.
• The Energy Transformation Board has identified a set of properties to act as 
the pathfinder project for solar PV on roofs of our housing stock. 
• Zero Waste Scotland are very interested in the concept for the Carberry 
former landfill site, which includes a solar farm, and have funded some 
feasibility work. Carberry landfill is still being considered by Zero Waste 
Scotland and further analysis is being commissioned to assess the quality of 
methane to see if a CHP installation is still viable for the site.
All lighting used for housing stock is now LED type.
We appointed an ESCO (People's Energy Company) to work with us on a pilot 
basis to develop an affordable tariff for residents of East Lothian and to 
advise on other innovations. People's Energy Company awarded contract. 
This contract is still live and the affordable tariff was launched in August 
2020. There was initial uptake of 82 households at the end of the first 3 
weeks.3.1gContinue to install LED lighting in our 
buildings and domestic stair wells. 
Exploring opportunities for future smart 
intelligent lightingStrategy & 
Development; 
Property 
Maintenance3.1fIdentify solar PV opportunities for public 
and private buildings where technically 
feasibleTransformation 
Board; Strategy & 
Development; 
Property 
MaintenanceNumber of PV 
installationsZero OngoingAnnual
3.1cRoll out the Energy Advice Service to 
support occupiers to run the buildings 
efficiently and effectively, particularly to 
those households most at risk of fuel 
poverty.Strategy & 
DevelopmentNumber of 
homes visited 
by Energy 
Advisors
3.1hContinue to explore setting up an Energy 
Service Company (ESCO)Housing; Property 
Maintenance; 
Strategy & 
Development; Energy 
Transformation BoardOngoingOngoing Ref ActionRelevant 
Strategy / 
PlanLead Person / Service Indicator BaselineTarget (where 
applicable)Target date UPDATE: AT DECEMBER 2020 NotesTracking of 
progress 
with actions
3.1jImprove knowledge and understanding of 
private housing stock, i.e. condition, fuel 
poverty, energy efficiency , to help 
understand those properties that are 
failing to meet the Scottish Government's 
EPC target and help facilitate Scottish 
Government funding to those who are 
eligible for energy efficiency measuresStrategy & 
DevelopmentNumber of 
private properties 
with energy 
efficiency dataAll assets to be 
surveyed and 
validated through 
systems such as 
Home Analytics 
and physical 
surveysAnnual An annual programme of assessing stock is currently taking place, 
although opportunities are being explored to change the Scottish 
Government's annual programme to a 3 year programme which should 
help to accelerate. COVID resulted in a postive impact as officers used 
the time while the construction sector was closed to identify potential 
properties through existing databases and drive-bys.NEW 
ACTION 
ADDED
3.1kReview and update the Council's 
affordable housing specification and 
design guide to ensure all future 
developments are low carbon and 
sustainableStrategy & 
DevelopmentTo review and 
update the 
Affordable 
Housing 
specification and 
design guide by 
March 20222022 Team Manager vacancy within the structure has resulted in delays. 
Post should be filled by April 2021.NEW 
ACTION 
ADDED
3.2cResearch opportunities to utilise local 
water bodies for renewables including 
local reservoirs and rivers Energy 
Transformation BoardOngoing Some preliminary contact has been made with interested parties who 
have committed to coming back to the Council with proposals. No 
further communication has been received to date.
We are named on a framework created by Midlothian Council in 
relation to District Heating Network should the opportunity arise for 
us; no further update.
We are currently seeking funding opportunities for exploring 
minewater geothermal heat potential of our former coalfields, and we 
are progressing a minewater geothermal feasibility study at 
Prestongrange Mining Museum. Expression of interest has also been 
submitted for potential funding opportunities to explore minewater 
geothermal at Blindwells.(to be 
confirmed 
by Scottish 
Govern-
ment)
For all relevant development proposals, planning officers will 
encourage developers to submit their proposals to reduce carbon 
emissions with their planning application. Where this has not been 
done, then the Council will impose a condition requiring details of 
measures to reduce carbon emissions to be submitted to and 
approved by the Planning Authority prior to the commencement of 
development.Pilot study completed looking at energy efficiency in East Lothian's 
Private Rented Housing Sector. A further round of pilots are underway 
and the Scottish Government is hoping to issue guidance towards the 
end of 2021 on the criteria and guidance for developing and 
implementing Local Heat and Energy Efficiency Strategies.
Pilot study completed looking at energy efficiency in East Lothian's 
Private Rented Housing Sector. The Scottish Government is hoping to 
issue guidance and criteria for producing Local Heat and Energy 
Efficiency Strategies at the end of 2021. In the meantime, the Council 
continues to explore opportunities for local renewable energy 
schemes with potential local benefits, such as district heating.
20233.2b3.2aParticipate in the Scottish Government’s 
pilot Local Heat and Energy Efficiency 
Strategy (LHEES) Programme and respond 
to proposals to create a statutory 
framework for LHEES LHEES
Introduce a Planning Condition for 
developers to report on their actions 
taken to reduce the carbon emissions 
from the build and from the completed 
developmentLDP; Climate 
Change 
StrategyStrategy & 
Development; 
Planning Service; 
Building Standards0 2020Production, 
adoption and 
implementation 
of an East Lothian 
Local Heat and 
Energy Efficiency 
Strategy (LHEES)Strategy & 
Development; SECCO; 
Planning; 
Transformation Team; 
Scottish GovernmentProduction of an 
East Lothian Local 
Heat and Energy 
Efficiency 
Strategy (LHEES) 
with identified 
actions
Explore with local communities to pursue 
local renewable energy schemes / 
Community Energy Schemes with local 
benefits, following on from LHEESLHEES; 
PlanningStrategy & 
Development; SECCO; 
Planning; 
Transformation Team; 
Area Partnerships; 
Community CouncilsTo be developed 
during LHEES 
process2025
3.2eKey Priority Area 2: Opportunities for Sustainable Energy and Heat
3.2dWork with partners to continue projects 
to explore the use of low carbon District 
Heat Networks in order to capture and 
utilise waste heat from industry, Energy 
From Waste plants, ground-source heat 
from disused mines, other heat sourcesLHEES; Local 
Develop-
ment Plan 
(LDP)Strategy & 
Development; 
Planning Service; 
SECCO; 
Transformation Team; 
external partnersNumber of 
District Heating 
Networks in place 
and number of 
buildings etc 
connected to 
themNeed to 
establish 
a baselineIncreased 
number of 
District Heating 
Networks in place 
and increased 
number of 
buildings etc 
connected to 
them Ref ActionRelevant 
Strategy / 
PlanLead Person / Service Indicator BaselineTarget (where 
applicable)Target date UPDATE: AT DECEMBER 2020 NotesTracking of 
progress 
with actions
3.2fEnsure all new build affordable housing 
delivered directly by the Council is as 
sustainable and low carbon as possibleStrategy & 
DevelopmentNumber of new 
build delivering 
renewable 
technologyAll affordable 
new build 
projects as a 
minimum must 
meet the Scottish 
Government's 
Greener Standard 
and beyond 
where possibleOngoing All New Build projects delivered in the last year have met the Scottish 
Government Greener Standards criteria. In addition to this, the 
Council is delivering air source heat pumps instead of gas at two sites 
in Tranent and is exploring a ParkPower opportunity at a site in 
Wallyford which has potential to attract additional funding. Further 
research is also being undertaken to explore geothermal and district 
heating at Blindwells.NEW 
ACTION 
ADDED
4.1aIncrease waste recycling in East Lothian to 
meet the 2025 targetWaste 
ManagementWaste Services % of total 
household waste 
that is recycled 
(national targets)51.8% 
(2016/17)70% 2025 55.3% (2019)
4.1bWork with Scottish Government to set 
interim targets for being a Zero Waste 
countyWaste Services; 
Scottish GovernmentAs soon as 
possible; by 
2025Long term treatment contract started November 2019 which will 
allows for additional recovery and enables East  Lothian to be 
compliant with the ban on biodegradable municipal waste going to 
landfill in Scotland.
4.1cWork with partners to progress 
installation of public taps / water 
fountains for refilling water bottlesWork with partners 
including Scottish 
Water / Planning 
ServiceNumber of taps 
installedIncreased 
number of taps 
installedAnnual East Lothian's first public water refill tap installed by Scottish Water in 
North Berwick (February 2020). Working with Scottish Water to 
identify other locations in East Lothian, with Musselburgh (outside 
Brunton Hall) being considered as part of Journey Hub proposal.Revise 
target 
date to 
2021
All new housing developments designed with Sustainable Drainage 
Systems (SUDS) since about 2015.
New projects underway:
Fa’side Lodge, Tranent - we are proposing an all-electric development 
with enhanced environmental standards using Air Source Heat Pumps. 
We have applied to the Scottish Government for a 2024 New Build 
Heat Standard Grant to help with the costs;
Blindwells – enhanced environmental standards and innovative 
methods are being considered.3.3aIncrease the awareness of the impacts of 
climate change  and what individuals / 
homeowners / employers can do to 
adapt, by setting up a website central hub 
linking to information from ELC and 
relevant partner agenciesClimate 
Change 
Strategy; 
Resilient 
Communities 
initiativeSECCO; Strategy & 
Development; Web 
Team; external 
partners including 
Adaptation ScotlandWebsite Hub set 
up; number of 
‘hits’ on websiteNone at 
present 
specificall
y for East 
LothianWebsite Hub set 
up; number of 
‘hits’ on website 
increasing
Increase in 
number of 
buildings / 
developments 
incorporating 
innovative green 
climate 
adaptation 
technologiesWebsite hub still to be progressed. However, the 'Climate Change and 
Sustainability' landing page of ELC's website includes website links to 
relevant external organisations and partner agencies including 
Adaptation Scotland.
EESSH compliance has increased by 24.31% year-on-year. At 
09/11/2020 EESSH compliance was 85.11%
3.3cAnnual 
return of 
the Social 
Housing 
Charter 
(ARC)2020 / 
ongoing
Work with partners to explore innovative 
options for adapting buildings and the 
urban environment for a changing 
climate, e.g. green roofs, green walls, 
ventilation adaptations, sustainable 
drainage systems
Outcome 4: A Resource Efficient and Sustainable East Lothian and the route to Zero Waste
Key Priority Area 1: Waste Reduction and RecyclingStrategy & 
Development; 
Housing Team; 
external partners and 
developersStrategy & 
Development; 
Housing Team; 
Property 
Maintenance; Scottish 
Government% of housing 
stock compliant 
with the SHQS / 
EESSH
20253.3bKey Priority Area 3: Climate Adaptation: Climate Ready Buildings
Continue to ensure that all Council 
properties meet Scottish Housing Quality 
Standards and Energy Efficiency Standards 
for Social Housing (EESSH) targets, which 
ensure homes are better adapted for a 
changing climateLocal Housing 
Strategy2020
SHQS - ongoing.
EESSH - 
December 2020.
Buildings / 
developments 
incorporating 
innovative green 
climate 
adaptation 
technologiesNo 
baseline 
at present Ref ActionRelevant 
Strategy / PlanLead Person / 
ServiceIndicator BaselineTarget (where 
applicable)Target 
dateUPDATE: AT DECEMBER 2020 NotesTracking of 
progress 
with actions
4.1hContinue to reduce the Carbon Impact of 
household waste generated and managed 
for East LothianWaste 
ManagementWaste Services Carbon Impact of 
household waste 
generated and 
managed for East 
Lothian (tCO2e) - 
from SEPA 
national dataIn 2018: 110,686 
tCO2e.
Carbon Impact per 
tonne of household 
waste managed in 
2018: 2.21.Continued reduction 
in Carbon Impact per 
tonne of household 
waste managed 
(from SEPA data)2025 In 2019: 106,233 tCO2e (i.e. a reduction of 4,453 tCO2e since 2018).
Carbon Impact per tonne of household waste managed in 2019: 2.13.NEW 
ACTION 
ADDEDCOVID 
IMPACT
Waste Services; 
Economic 
Development & 
Strategic 
Investment; 
SECCO; partners 
including Zero 
Waste ScotlandCircular Economy 
initiatives / Zero 
Waste hubs 
progressingZero Waste Hubs 
currently in 
Musselburgh and 
DunbarProgressing Circular 
Economy initiatives / 
Zero Waste hubs in 
all of East Lothian's 
communitiesDevelopment of a 
Zero Waste 
Events policy
2025Economic 
Development; 
Resource 
Efficient 
Scotland (RES); 
businessesNumber of 
energy/resource 
efficiency 
measures 
installed; cost 
saved to 
businesses - as 
per RES dataIncreased uptake of 
energy/resource 
efficiency measures 
by businesses; 
increased cost 
savingsongoing
4.1fContinue to assist businesses and event 
organisers to implement resource 
efficiency, energy efficiency and waste 
reduction measures4.1dSupport communities to progress towards 
and achieve Plastic Free Community 
statusClimate 
Change 
StrategySECCO; Waste 
Services; 
community 
partners 
4.2aWork with partners to progress Circular 
Economy options for East Lothian's 
communities - including expanding 'Zero 
Waste' initiatives into all of East Lothian's 
communitiesNo policy currently 
in placeZero Waste Events 
policy established 2025Inclusion in Climate Change strategy - enabling communities to 
achieve objective one on Local Governance. Climate Change Officer 
supporting 'Sustaining Musselburgh' (sub-group of Musselburgh Area 
Partnership) to progress Plastic Free Town status for Musselburgh.
No update to report.
COVID related work a priority this year.
All four Recycling Centres across the county have reuse cabins.4.1gProgress revision of licencing / permits so 
lease-holders / activities are required to 
cut single-use plastic and strongly 
encouraged to attempt a zero waste 
activity and demonstrate carbon 
reduction strategiesLegal & 
Licensing; SECCORevised licensing 
/ permits 
progressingTo be established Progressing revision 
of licences / permits 
to reduce single-use 
plastic use and 
encourage zero 
waste ethos  All events activities severely impacted by COVID, all in-person events 
cancelled and some moved online which may have had a positive 
impact on waste. Many businesses who organise or rely on events for 
income most severely affected by the pandemic.
Comments from event organisers in the past have highlighted issues 
with recycling at events, whereby ‘recycling’ is contaminated by public 
not separating waste. Attractions have also looked at the potential for 
collectively buying Vegware or equivalent, as costs prohibit some 
attractions from using. Climate Change Officer attended a meeting to 
help discussion on green tourism/recycling etc. practices.
All events activities severely impacted by COVID, all in-person events 
cancelled and some moved online which may have had a positive 
impact on waste. Many businesses who organise or rely on events for 
income most severely affected by the pandemic.
Comments from event organisers in the past have highlighted issues 
with recycling at events, whereby ‘recycling’ is contaminated by public 
not separating waste. Attractions have also looked at the potential for 
collectively buying Vegware or equivalent, as costs prohibit some 
attractions from using. Climate Change Officer attended a meeting to 
help discussion on green tourism/recycling etc. practices. Pre COVID, 
Countryside Service requested that Event organisers submit their 
proposals for carbon footprint reduction / improving sustainability of 
the event when considering event applications.Economic 
Development & 
Strategic 
Investment; 
partners4.1e
Develop and implement a Zero Waste 
Events policy
2025
Key Priority Area 2: Circular Economy Ref ActionRelevant 
Strategy / PlanLead Person / 
ServiceIndicator BaselineTarget (where 
applicable)Target 
dateUPDATE: AT DECEMBER 2020 NotesTracking of 
progress 
with actions
COVID 
IMPACT
Annual Capital Budget allocated to replace 3G sports pitch carpets from 
2022/23 onwards.  Mitigation measures will be built into tender for 
replacement following engagement with and input from locally-based 
environmental organisation 'Fidra'.4.3bReduction of litter through promotion / 
awareness-raising and initiatives, 
including supporting the work of local 
groups in reducing littering
Climate 
Change 
StrategySECCO, Sports 
Development; 
Fidra; other 
external 
partnersNumber of 
artificial sports 
pitches with 
solutions to 
reduce / 
eliminate 
microplastic 
granule loss 
implementedNo sports pitches 
currently have 
installations to 
reduce / eliminate 
microplastic lossIncrease number of 
Artificial sports 
pitches to have  
installations to 
reduce / eliminate 
microplastic loss4.2bWork with partners to support the 
establishment of Repair Cafés / facilities 
in each community, including the 
provision of storage facilities so that tool 
shares, toy libraries and household 
equipment libraries can be hostedWaste Services; 
Economic 
Development & 
Strategic 
Investment; 
SECCO;  
Connected 
Communities; 
partners Establishment of 
circular economy 
facilities 
progressingTool Library already 
established in 
MusselburghIncreased number of 
circular economy 
facilities across the 
county2025
4.2cBusinesses: Work with partners including 
Zero Waste Scotland to encourage circular 
economy business models among East 
Lothian's businessesWaste Services; 
Economic 
Development & 
Strategic 
Investment; 
SECCO; partners 
including Zero 
Waste Scotland; 
businessesNumber of 
businesses using 
circular economy 
business models2025
Prepare a Code of Practice on Litter and 
Refuse (COPLAR)Amenity 
ServicesPreparation of 
Code of Practice 
on Litter and 
Refuse (COPLAR)Code of Practice on 
Litter and Refuse 
(COPLAR) prepared2025
4.3a
To be established 
once Code of 
Practice on Litter 
and Refuse 
(COPLAR) 
developedNeed to establish 
baselineIncreasing number 
of businesses using 
circular economy 
business models
COPLAR Amenity 
Services; SECCO; 
external 
partners2025
4.3cWork with partners to implement  
practical and cost-effective solutions for 
reducing and eliminating microplastic 
granule loss into the environment from 
all our artificial sports pitchesTool repair project supported at Kinwegar Recycling Centre and bikes 
and parts from all four Recycling Centres are collected for repair/reuse 
projects.
Area Partnerships have supported various initiatives in our 
communities, including Tool Library project in the Musselburgh area. 
COVID priorities have meant that it has not been possible to progress 
this action further during 2020.
Booklet on waste and recycling for East Lothian businesses being 
produced.
Business Gateway continues to support businesses in this regard. ELC 
is working with public sector partners to consider the benefits of a 
community wealth building approach.
We worked with Zero Waste Scotland to develop ELC’s Sustainable 
Procurement Policy (approved by Cabinet in Nov 2020) - this policy is a 
significant milestone setting out ELC’s sustainability and circular 
economy principles; the next step in implementing the policy is to roll 
out a pilot to trial the sustainability and circular economy 
requirements of the policy with businesses tendering for Council 
contracts.
No update as LEAMS hasn't been updated yet - due to be changed to 
Litter Management System - awaiting Zero Waste Scotland to confirm 
before we can progress this.
Ongoing promotion and awareness-raising. Corporate 
Communications has publicised national litter campaigns during the 
COVID pandemic. 
COVID related increase in litter in bins (“good litter”) due to COVID 
lockdown and people not working or home-working – all bins were 
full all the time, bins were overflowing – due to increase in people 
walking / dog walking locally during COVID lockdown and the good 
weather.Key Priority Area 3: Reducing Litter and Plastic Waste Ref ActionRelevant 
Strategy / PlanLead Person / 
ServiceIndicator Baseline Target (where applicable)Target 
dateUPDATE: AT DECEMBER 2020 NotesTracking of 
progress 
with actions
5.1aImplement Economic Development 
Strategy refresh: Take opportunities to 
encourage low carbon innovation, 
research, new business opportunities – 
e.g. in renewablesEconomic 
Development 
Strategy (EDS)Economic 
Development & 
Strategic 
Investment; 
partnersDevelopment of low 
carbon innovation / 
research / new business 
opportunities: number 
of Business Gateway 
starts in this sector and 
Business Gateway 
growth meetingsIncreasing number of 
Business Gateway starts 
in this sector and 
Business Gateway growth 
meetings.  DDI (Data 
Driven Innovation) City 
Deal project offers 
innovation opportunities, 
exploratory stage.Annually 
to 2025We are continuing to implement the Economic 
Development Strategy and through Business Gateway 
respond to demand from potential start-ups in all 
sectors.  Note too participation in Forth & Tay Offshore, 
consortium of local authorities and developers along 
East Coast, and aiming to connect supply chain with 
developers, do training etc.
5.1cWork with partners to build low carbon 
planning, energy efficiency and 
sustainability advice into the East 
Lothian business support ecosystem, 
and continue to support businesses to 
reduce their carbon footprint, improve 
energy and resource efficiency, and 
increase sustainability in their 
processes, supply chains, packaging, 
distributionEDS Economic 
Development & 
Strategic 
Investment; 
partners 
including 
Resource 
Efficient 
ScotlandNumber of businesses 
supported to improve 
energy/resource 
efficiency, as recorded 
by ELC’s resource 
efficiency consultantIncreased number of 
businesses supported to 
improve energy/resource 
efficiencyAnnually 
to 2025This action ongoing via Business Gateway and others, 
but all business activity severely affected by the COVID 
pandemic. 
COVID 
IMPACT
5.1dSupport the faster roll out of Superfast 
Broadband, including required 
infrastructure for new developmentsEDS Economic 
Development & 
Strategic 
Investment; 
partners% of East Lothian 
properties with 
Superfast Broadband 
(30Mbps - National 
target)85% (2016/17) 100% (2022) 2022 91% in 2018/19.
(2019/20 figure not yet available)
5.1e Seeking Cabinet approval to DELETE THIS ACTIONDELETE 
ACTION
5.1fPromote and add a new Business 
Gateway course on ‘Running a 
Sustainable Business’EDS Economic 
Development & 
Strategic 
Investment; 
partnersImplementation of a 
Business Gateway course 
on ‘Running a 
Sustainable Business’; 
number of participantsNo course at 
present; need to 
establish baseline 
for minimum 
number of 
participants to 
make course viableBusiness Gateway course 
on ‘Running a Sustainable 
Business’ implemented 
and promoted; minimum 
number of participants 
achieved2025 No update to report.
COVID 
IMPACT5.1bWork with partners to develop training 
and development opportunities in the 
low carbon technologies and 
renewables sectors to future-proof our 
county and our workforce for the 
technological advances of the futureEDS Economic 
Development & 
Strategic 
Investment; 
partnersDevelopment of training 
and development 
opportunities in the low 
carbon technologies and 
renewables sectors:  
Look to run Business 
Gateway workshops on 
Environmentally 
Sustainable business 
model – number each 
year with attendeesIncreasing number of 
training and 
development 
opportunities in the low 
carbon technologies and 
renewables sectorsAnnually 
to 2025Outcome 5: A Low Carbon and Sustainable Economy
Key Priority Area 1: Businesses and the Local Economy
LIL ('Low Impact Living' - East Lothian Social Enterprise) 
focused on low impact living, sustainability etc. They 
have developed a consulting program for businesses on 
how to be more sustainable. Note too participation in 
Forth & Tay Offshore, consortium of local authorities 
and developers along East Coast, and aiming to connect 
supply chain with developers, do training etc. Ref ActionRelevant 
Strategy / PlanLead Person / 
ServiceIndicator BaselineTarget (where 
applicable)Target 
dateUPDATE: AT DECEMBER 2020 NotesTracking of 
progress 
with actions
5.1iWork with partners to explore 
opportunities to develop the Carbon 
Capture, Utilisation and, potentially, 
Storage (CCUS) sector in East LothianEconomic 
Development & 
Strategic 
Investment; 
partnersCockenzie – NPF3 for 
renewable energy, 
ongoing engagement 
with potential 
investors2025 No update to report. Will continue to liaise with 
partners including the Scottish Government.COVID 
IMPACT
COVID 
IMPACT
Key Priority Area 2: Thriving Town and Rural Centres
5.2aAnnual
Continue to support the ‘Town Centre 
First’ Principle to develop and enhance 
our town and rural centresLDP; EDS; 
Town Centre 
StrategiesAll relevant 
services; 
Planning Service; 
Economic 
Development & 
Strategic 
Investment;  
Connected 
Communities / 
Area 
Partnerships and 
other partnersAs per LDP, EDS and 
Town Centre StrategiesAs per LDP, EDS and 
Town Centre 
StrategiesAs per LDP, EDS and 
Town Centre Strategies2020 / 
ongoing
COVID 
IMPACTThis action is ongoing. Capital funding from Scottish 
Government is likely to increase in support of town 
centres in response to the COVID pandemic.
The impact of COVID-19 has increasingly brought the 
importance of local economies and supply chains to 
the fore; sustainability (all kinds) and resilience are 
seen as important going forward. There has been a 
drop off in the use of public transport, but in many 
cases more focus on accessing services on foot (though 
car use is up and likely to stay that way for some time). 
Many businesses / towns actively considering local 
delivery services etc.No update to report on engagement with Industry at 
this stage. However, the emissions figures from the 
Industry sector for East Lothian for 2018 (the latest 
data available from UK Government - BEIS) show a 
decrease in emissions in most areas:
2018 data for East Lothian: Industry & Commercial 
Electricity: 69.5 ktCO2; Industry & Commercial Gas: 39.1 
ktCO2; Large Industrial Installations: 575.7 ktCO2; 
Industrial & Commercial Other Fuels: 30.3 ktCO2.
Opportunities to pursue this via the COVID-19 Rural 
Economic Recovery Group with key partners in the 
rural economy – the Climate Change Officer attends 
these meetings and ‘Climate Change’ is an agenda 
item.
The emissions from the Agriculture sector in East 
Lothian for 2018 (the latest data available from UK 
Government – BEIS) shows a decrease in emissions 
from Agriculture sector to 18.9 ktCO2.
As per EDS; linkages 
with Visit East Lothian 
channels2020 / 
ongoing
5.2bVibrant Low Carbon Local Economies – 
continue to support locally driven 
improvements to access, retail, service, 
and visitor experience in town and 
rural centres enhancing the circular 
economy (‘shop local’, farmers’ 
markets, making connections to East 
Lothian Food & Drink, broad based 
business support, active and 
sustainable travel).EDS; LTS; 
Town Centre 
Strategies; 
Area PlansEconomic 
Development & 
Strategic 
Investment;  
Connected 
Communities / 
Area 
Partnerships and 
other partnersCOVID 
IMPACTDecrease in emissions 
from Agriculture sectorEconomic 
Development & 
Strategic 
Investment; 
Countryside 
Services; 
partnersEmissions from 
Agriculture sector, from 
UK Government data5.1gIndustry: Engage with local industry 
and work in partnership to support and 
encourage our local industries and 
national agencies to reduce emissions 
from industry (including exploring 
carbon off-setting projects), supporting 
the Scottish Government’s targets
5.1h2017 data for East 
Lothian: Industry & 
Commercial 
Electricity: 73.1 ktCO2; 
Industry & Commercial 
Gas: 38.4 ktCO2; Large 
Industrial 
Installations: 589.7 
ktCO2; Industrial & 
Commercial Other 
Fuels: 33.7 ktCO2Decrease in emissions 
from Industry sectorAnnual Economic 
Development & 
Strategic 
Investment; 
partnersEmissions from Industry 
sector, from UK 
Government data
As per EDS2017 data for East 
Lothian: Agriculture: 
19.1 ktCO2Agriculture: Engage with farmers and 
landowners and work in partnership to 
support and encourage our local 
agriculture sector and national 
agencies to reduce emissions from 
agriculture and promote biodiversity 
and sustainability, supporting the 
Scottish Government’s targets
As per EDS Ref ActionRelevant 
Strategy / PlanLead Person / 
ServiceIndicator Baseline Target (where applicable)Target 
dateUPDATE: AT DECEMBER 2020 NotesTracking of 
progress 
with actions
5.2hProactive Planning – Encourage well 
connected, sustainable, low carbon 
town, local, and rural centre 
development, and recognising shifting 
retail and working trends, support 
mixed uses in centres to enhance 
sustainability and resilienceLDP; EDS; LHS; 
Town Centre 
StrategiesPlanning Service; 
EDSI;  Connected 
Communities / 
Area Partnerships 
and other partnersAs per LDP, EDS and 
Town Centre 
StrategiesAs per LDP, EDS 
and Town 
Centre 
StrategiesAs per LDP, EDS and Town 
Centre Strategies2020 / 
ongoingEconomic 
Development and 
Strategic 
Investment; 
Planning Service;  
Connected 
Communities / 
Area Partnerships 
and other partnersAs per LHS, EDS, LDP, 
Local Area Plans, and 
Town Centre 
Strategies
COVID 
IMPACT
Development of actions ongoing - this will be key as 
part of the long term response to COVID-19.Economic 
Development and 
Strategic 
Investment; 
Planning Service;  
Connected 
Communities / 
Area Partnerships 
and other partnersAs per EDS, LDP, Local 
Area Plans, and Town 
Centre StrategiesAs per EDS, LDP, 
Local Area 
Plans, and Town 
Centre 
Strategies5.2eContinue to develop, deliver, and 
support town, local, and village centre 
regeneration initiatives including the 
repair of and improvements to the 
insulation and energy efficiency of 
private and local authority business 
premises, and the reuse of vacant / 
derelict buildings and land for mixed 
use development.LHS; LPD; EDS; 
Town Centre 
StrategiesEconomic 
Development and 
Strategic 
Investment; 
Planning Service;  
Connected 
Communities / 
Area Partnerships 
and other partnersAs per LHS, EDS, LDP, 
and Town Centre 
StrategiesAs per LHS, EDS, 
LDP, and Town 
Centre 
StrategiesAs per LHS, EDS, LDP, and Town 
Centre Strategies2020 / 
ongoingEconomic 
Development & 
Strategic 
Investment; Town 
Centre partnersNumber of local 
business hubs / co-
working spaces 
progressing5.2dEDS; Town 
Centre 
StrategiesWork with partners to investigate 
options for local business hubs / co-
working spaces, and support local co-
working initiatives, if demand is 
identified.EDS; Town 
Centre 
StrategiesEconomic 
Development & 
Strategic 
Investment; Town 
Centre partnersAs per EDS As per EDS As per EDS 2020 / 
ongoing
5.2cProvide specific support and 
signposting for low carbon, zero waste, 
sustainable, and social enterprise / 
community wealth building business 
models.
As per EDS, LDP, Local Area 
Plans, and Town Centre 
Strategies2020 / 
ongoing5.2fEnterprising Communities - Support 
local efforts to enhance East Lothian’s 
town, local, and village centres, 
helping deliver community-led 
regeneration.EDS; LDP; LHS; 
Town Centre 
Strategies; 
Area PlansContinues via Business Gateway and Economic 
Development activities, though focus has been on 
COVID-19 support and recovery. 
Expect new models to develop post COVID-19 as home 
working increases as a default for many services and 
businesses - blended models are likely. 
Activities continue via Town Centre regeneration 
projects; sustainability and energy efficiency a priority 
in the repair / reuse of buildings / sites; uses / 
activities that support the local economy are a focus. 
Support has focused on local structure during the 
response and early recovery phases linked to COVID-
19. Local business groups now established in most 
towns and funding being provided for the 
development of projects focused on the local 
economy - many of these support local activity and 
sustainability.  
ELC is currently supporting work by Scottish 
Government / Scottish Tech Army to look at creating a 
digital towns / digital community platform as a 
response to COVID-19 and the shift to online, this 
considers how towns/ areas could have a digital 
marketplace that links community and business. COVID 
IMPACT
COVID 
IMPACT
COVID 
IMPACT
5.2gDigital Towns – Continue to support 
measures to ensure that all town, local, 
and rural centres have the appropriate 
future-proofed infrastructure required 
to enable East Lothian to have the most 
digitally-connected local economy and 
communities.EDS; LDP; 
Town Centre 
StrategiesAs per LHS, EDS, 
LDP, Local Area 
Plans, and Town 
Centre 
StrategiesAs per LHS, EDS, LDP, Local 
Area Plans, and Town Centre 
Strategies2020 / 
ongoingIncreased number of local 
business hubs / co-working 
spaces progressing. If demand 
is identified, then work with 
partners to realise this 
demand, based on funding, 
commitment from businesses, 
availability of premises.Annual Ref ActionRelevant 
Strategy / 
PlanLead Person / 
ServiceIndicator Baseline Target (where applicable)Target 
dateUPDATE: AT DECEMBER 2020 NotesTracking of 
progress 
with actions
Key Priority Area 3: Climate Adaptation: Climate Ready Businesses
SECCO; Economic 
Development & 
Strategic 
Investment (EDSI); 
partners including 
Adaptation 
ScotlandNumber of businesses, 
public sector 
organisations and other 
institutions prepared for 
climate change impacts; 
number of Business 
Continuity Plans in placeCOVID 
IMPACT
COVID 
IMPACT
COVID 
IMPACTDevelopment of actions ongoing - this will be 
key as part of the long term response to COVID-
19.
Economic Development service reports this is 
definitely a topic for an event with the business 
community, once we can do them, post-COVID.
This will be a key area to explore going forward.
Ongoing. Encouraged and supported by Amenity 
Services / Tree Officer on Council-owned land, 
and local groups also encouraged to contact 
private landowners to identify potential 
suitable sites for tree planting. Orchards being 
progressed with community groups e.g. at 
Lewisvale Park, Musselburgh, and in 
Prestonpans. Proposal to progress an 'East 
Lothian Climate Forest' - ambition for extensive 
tree planting programme across East Lothian, 
working in partnership.
A work programme has been prepared for this 
setting out how the work will be implemented. 
Preliminary work will start on this shortly.
Plant 40,000m2 of wildflower meadows 
in East Lothian each year to improve 
biodiversity and increase pollination5.3aWork with partners to encourage and 
support business, public sector and 
third sector organisations and other 
institutions prepare for the challenges 
and opportunities presented by 
climate change, including preparing 
Business Continuity Plans
Outcome 6: A Healthy and Resilient Natural Environment and the route to Carbon Neutral
Biodiversity 
Action PlanSport, Countryside 
& Leisure;  
Connected 
Communities / 
Area Partnerships 
and other partners; 
volunteersArea of wildflower 
meadows planted30,000m2 
(2019)Increasing number of 
businesses, public sector 
organisations and other 
institutions prepared for 
climate change impacts; 
increasing no. of Business 
Continuity Plans in place2025
Added 
Economic 
Development 
as a service 
delivering this 
action
Prepare a Woodland and Forestry 
Strategy for East Lothian, as required by 
Scotland’s new planning act5.3bWork with partners to raise awareness 
of climate change impacts on 
businesses / climate adaptation 
measuresSECCO; EDSI; 
partners including 
Adaptation 
ScotlandNumber of articles / 
eventsIncrease number of 
promotional articles and 
events attended2025
Key Priority Area 1: Our Natural Environment and Biodiversity5.3cEngage local businesses with the 
Resilient Communities initiative and 
the Council’s Severe Weather 
Emergency Planning, to identify where 
they can provide support for our local 
communities in times of hardship due 
to climate and severe weather impactsResilient 
Communities 
initiativeEconomic 
Development; 
SECCO; Protective 
Services; 
Emergency 
Planning, Risk & 
Resilience Team; 
businessesProduction of Emergency 
Response / Community 
Resilience  plans to 
include local businessesAll Emergency Response / 
Community Resilience plans 
include local businessesOngoing 
to 2025
Number of native trees 
planted / hectares of 
new woodland planted 
annually
Preparation of a 
Woodland and Forestry 
Strategy for East LothianWoodland and Forestry 
Strategy for East Lothian 
prepared, adopted and 
implemented2025
Ongoing – we continue to progress this. New 
opportunities are being taken, e.g. a wildflower 
area is being planted alongside the new shared-
use cycleway adjacent to the coast road 
between Cockenzie and Prestonpans, to create 
a green network alongside the cycleway 
between the berm and the new widened 
cycleway.40,000m2 annually
6.1c6.1b
annuallyTo be 
established 
(tree planting 
underway for 
many years)
Sport, Countryside 
& Leisure; Planning 
Service6.1aProgress an extensive annual native 
Tree Planting and maintenance 
programme in East Lothian to offset 
carbon emissions, in appropriate 
locationsBiodiversity 
Action PlanSport, Countryside 
& Leisure;  
Connected 
Communities / 
Area Partnerships 
and other partners; 
volunteersIncreased tree planting annually Ref ActionRelevant 
Strategy / 
PlanLead Person / 
ServiceIndicator Baseline Target (where applicable)Target 
dateUPDATE: AT DECEMBER 2020 NotesTracking of 
progress 
with actions
6.1dReview and update actions in ELC 
Countryside Site Management Plans to 
ensure they reflect best practice in site 
management for carbon sequestration / 
carbon storage potential – particularly for 
Aberlady Bay, John Muir Country Park, 
Gullane Bay; subject to the appropriate 
Habitat Regulations AssessmentELC 
Countryside 
Site 
Management 
PlansCountryside 
ServiceProduction of revised 
Countryside Site 
Management Plans that 
reflect best practice in 
carbon sequestration / 
storage potentialCurrent 
actions in 
Countryside 
Site 
Management 
PlansAll Countryside Site 
Management Plans have 
actions that reflect best 
practice in carbon 
sequestration / storage 
potential2025 Three Management Plans are under 
review.
6.1eImplement actions in revised ELC 
Countryside Site Management Plans to 
ensure countryside sites / natural habitats 
are in prime condition to sequester and 
store carbon; subject to the appropriate 
Habitat Regulations AssessmentELC 
Countryside 
Site 
Management 
PlansCountryside 
Service; partners; 
volunteersCondition of Countryside 
Sites indicatorBaseline 
Condition has 
been 
established 
for all relevant 
sitesIncreased Condition of 
Countryside Sites indicator 
score; countryside sites / 
natural habitats are in prime 
condition to sequester and 
store carbon2025 Many actions disrupted by COVID. Some 
seasonal actions put back a year.  
COVID 
IMPACT
6.1fProduce an updated Biodiversity Action 
Plan to tackle the Ecological EmergencyBiodiversity 
Action PlanCountryside 
ServiceProduction of updated 
Biodiversity Action PlanUpdated Biodiversity Action 
Plan published2022 Progress on Local Biodiversity Action 
Plan delayed due to COVID-19.COVID 
IMPACT
6.1hNaturalise amenity grassland to enhance 
local biodiversity, improve natural habitats 
and support wildlifeBiodiversity 
Action PlanCountryside 
Service; volunteers% of amenity grassland 
naturalised10% of amenity grassland 
naturalised2022 New areas identified for naturalised 
grassland in Port Seton and Haddington. 
6.1iProtect the status of designated sites, and 
enhance the natural resource (particularly 
woodland, saltmarsh, peatland and other 
carbon rich soils which function in carbon 
sequestration), working with national 
partnersBiodiversity 
Action Plan, 
LDP, Green 
Networks 
Strategy SPG Countryside 
Service; partnersAs per national site 
condition monitoring 
indicatorsBaseline 
established as 
per national 
site condition 
monitoring 
indicatorsAs per national site condition 
monitoring indicatorsOngoing / 
2025Many actions disrupted by COVID. Some 
seasonal actions put back a year.  
COVID 
IMPACT
6.1kWork with farmers and landowners to 
maximise carbon storage potential of land-
use by planting of woodland or individual 
trees; peatland restoration and 
conservation projects; wetland creation; 
carbon sequestration, working with 
national agenciesBiodiversity 
Action Plan; 
Green 
Networks 
StrategyCountryside 
Service; national 
and local partnersNational indicators; 
implementation of 
conservation projects 
working in partnershipAs per 
national 
indicatorsAs per national indicators; 
Conservation projects 
implemented working in 
partnershipOngoing Impacted by COVID this year.
COVID 
IMPACTBiodiversity Priorities moving forward 
to be agreed with partners through 
Local Biodiversity Action Plan process.6.1gImplement the Biodiversity Priorities in the 
East Lothian Biodiversity Action Plan across 
East LothianBiodiversity 
Action PlanCountryside 
Service; partners; 
volunteersAs per Biodiversity 
Action PlanOngoing / 
2025
6.1jWoodland creation / enhancement, native 
tree planting and hedgerow planting in and 
around our communities (in appropriate 
locations) to offset the carbon emissions 
and traffic pollution in urban areasGreen 
Networks 
Strategy SPG; 
OSS; Forestry 
& Woodland 
Strategy; LDPSport, Countryside 
& Leisure; Strategy 
& Development;  
Connected 
Communities / 
Area Partnerships 
and other partnersAreas of native 
woodland planted; 
number of native 
urban/street trees 
plantedAs per ELC 
Tree 
Management 
(Amenity 
Services) 
baselineIncreased areas of woodland 
in and around towns; 
increased numbers of 
urban/street treesOngoing / 
2025Ongoing. Options are currently under 
consideration to take this forward on a 
larger scale. Continue to be 
implemented in new developments. Ref ActionRelevant 
Strategy / 
PlanLead Person / 
ServiceIndicator Baseline Target (where applicable)Target 
dateUPDATE: AT DECEMBER 2020 NotesTracking of 
progress 
with actions
6.1mThe Council’s Countryside Ranger 
Service to interpret / educate / raise 
awareness of climate change 
mitigation, adaptation and 
sequestration as part of their remitELC 
Countryside 
Ranger 
Service Roles 
and RemitELC Countryside 
Ranger ServiceInclusion and 
implementation of  
interpretation / 
education / awareness-
raising about climate 
change mitigation, 
adaptation and 
sequestration in ELCRS 
remitCurrently 
undertaken as 
required / 
when 
opportunities 
ariseInclusion of  interpretation / 
education / awareness-raising 
about climate change 
mitigation, adaptation and 
sequestration in ELCRS remit 
and being implemented2020 Disrupted by COVID this year. Revise target 
date to 2021
COVID 
IMPACT
6.1nWork in partnership to look after the 
marine environment, including East 
Lothian’s coast and beaches (e.g. beach 
cleans), including the responsible use 
and enjoyment of the coastCountryside 
Site 
Management 
PlansELC Countryside 
Ranger Service; 
partners; 
volunteersActions in Countryside 
Site Management Plans; 
number of beach cleans / 
promotional events etcAs per actions 
in Countryside 
Site 
Management 
PlansAs per actions in Countryside 
Site Management Plans; 
maintain & increase numbers 
of beach clean events / 
promotional events etc as 
appropriateOngoing Disrupted by COVID this year.
COVID 
IMPACT
COVID 
IMPACT2025 Production of study into 
impacts of increasing 
recreational pressures on East 
Lothian’s coast, to inform 
future management6.1lUndertake projects to improve and 
encourage biodiversity & wildlife and 
enhance natural habitats in and around 
our communities and urban areas, 
including managing amenity 
greenspace for biodiversity / 
pollinators, riverside habitats, 
 Biodiversity 
Action Plan; 
OSSSport, 
Countryside & 
Leisure; the 
Wildlife 
Information 
Centre (TWIC); 
partners; Number of local 
biodiversity projects 
supported; records / 
surveys of urban wildlifeAs per Wildlife 
Information 
Centre 
records; 
Biodiversity 
Action PlanIncreased number of local 
biodiversity projects 
supported; increased records 
of urban wildlifeOngoing
6.1oInvestigate the impacts of increasing 
recreational pressures on East Lothian’s 
coast, including recreational 
disturbance to habitats and wildlife, 
and the cumulative impactsOngoing. Grassland project currently being developed 
in partnership with Plantlife. Actively seeking funding 
to progress this project. 
Disrupted by COVID. The Habitat Regulations Appraisal 
of the Local Development Plan recommended that a 
study of the impact of recreational pressures on the 
Firth of Forth Special Protection Area should be carried 
out to inform future plans and projects for the coast. 
This is relevant to the management of the coast as well 
as future development and use of the coastal area. 
Some of the qualifying interest species of the Firth of 
Forth Special Protection area are not in favourable 
condition, and recreational pressures are potentially 
one of the reasons for this. Even where the relevant 
species are currently in favourable status, further 
recreational pressures including additional visitors 
from new development, were this to occur, could 
impact them. It is therefore important to understand 
what the capacity of the Firth of Forth SPA is to 
accommodate increasing or different patterns of 
recreational use. 
This study is likely to require to be procured 
externally. The study is best undertaken over a full 
winter bird season (September to April/May). 
Coincident with, and probably because of, COVID-19 
recreational activity at the coast this year has seen a 
large increase, which potentially could mean the 
situation now could vary significantly from the norm. It 
is therefore hoped (subject to budget) that it will be 
possible to commission the study later this year, with a 
view to field work starting in September 2021.  Sport, 
Countryside & 
Leisure; 
Economic 
Development; 
partners; 
Planning ServiceProduction of study into  
impacts of increasing 
recreational pressures on 
East Lothian’s coast Ref ActionRelevant 
Strategy / PlanLead Person / 
ServiceIndicator BaselineTarget (where 
applicable)Target 
dateUPDATE: AT DECEMBER 2020 NotesTracking of 
progress 
with actions
6.2eACTION NOW COMBINED WITH ACTION 6.2b - 
DELETE THIS ACTIONSeeking 
Cabinet 
approval to 
DELETE THIS 
ACTIONACTION NOW 
COMBINED 
WITH ACTION 
6.2E - seeking 
Cabinet 
approval for 
thisCOVID 
IMPACT
To be considered in Flood Studies identified in 
Local Flood Risk Management Plan.
Ongoing. Continue to be implemented in new 
developments.
Continuing. Due to COVID, Amenity Services’ work 
on controlling Giant Hogweed started slightly later 
than usual this year but have caught up since then. 
Amenity Services are also controlling Giant 
Hogweed alongside the River Esk in Musselburgh 
to prevent detrimental impact on flood protection 
work. 
The East Lothian Local Development Plan (LDP) 
was adopted in September 2018, and is ‘in-date’ 
until 2023. The Planning Policy and Strategy team 
is completing a work package on integrating 
climate change issues into the LDP. The next step 
will be the production of an Evidence Report, 
which will set out where we are now, and how we 
intend to take forward this work. Consultation will 
be carried out on the Evidence Report. 6.2fIncorporate into LDP and implement the 
climate change adaptation measures for 
new developments as set out in East 
Lothian’s Green Network Strategy 
Supplementary Planning Guidance (SPG)LDP; Green 
Networks SPGPlanning Service; 
Sport, Countryside 
& LeisureAs set out in  Green 
Network Strategy SPGAs set out in  
Green Network 
Strategy SPGDevelopment of 
adaptation measures 
as set out in Green 
Network Strategy SPGOngoing / 
20256.2b
6.2dContinue to control invasive species2025
6.2cPlant trees and hedgerows around urban 
areas to create natural areas of shade and 
shelterForestry & 
Woodland 
Strategy; 
Biodiversity 
Action Plan; 
Green Networks 
Strategy
Sport, Countryside 
& Leisure; partnersEradication of non-native 
invasive plant species6.2aPromote and facilitate the adaptation of 
the natural environment by enhancing 
natural habitats and landscape features 
e.g. coastal dune systems, saltmarsh;  
subject to the appropriate Habitat 
Regulations AssessmentCountryside 
Site 
Management 
Plans; Green 
Networks 
StrategyCountryside 
Service; partnersAs per Countryside Site 
Management Plans; 
Biodiversity Action PlanAs per 
Countryside Site 
Management 
Plans; 
Biodiversity 
Action PlanAs per Countryside 
Site Management 
Plans; Biodiversity 
Action PlanOngoing
Sport, Countryside 
& Leisure;  
Connected 
Communities / 
Area Partnerships 
and other 
community 
partnersLength of hedgerows 
planted; number of 
urban/street trees 
plantedAs per ELC Tree 
Management 
(Amenity 
Services) 
baselineIncreased length of 
hedgerows planted; 
increased numbers of 
urban/street trees2025Work with landowners to create 
connected blue networks and progress 
natural flood management, natural river 
flood protection measures / floodwater 
storage by improving and creating natural 
riverine habitats, including freshwater 
marshland, wetlands and Sustainable 
Drainage System opportunitiesFlood Risk 
Management 
Strategy; Flood 
Protection 
studies; Green 
Networks 
StrategyStructures & 
Flooding Team; 
Countryside 
Service; 
landownersOpportunities are taken 
to work with landowners 
to improve blue 
networks and natural 
flood management; 
Progression of natural 
river flood protection 
measuresAs per Flood Risk 
Management 
Strategy; 
preliminary 
studies 
underwayIncreased blue 
network connectivity 
and areas of natural 
flood management 
identified; natural 
river flood protection 
measures and habitat 
improvements 
progressingKey Priority Area 2: Climate Adaptation and the Natural Environment
Many actions disrupted by COVID. Some seasonal 
actions put back a year. Sea buckthorn removal 
continues at Aberlady, Gullane & John Muir 
Country Park per site management plans to 
improve sand dune habitat. 
Countryside 
Management 
PlansAs per 
management of 
invasive speciesWork towards 
eradication of non-
native invasive plant 
speciesOngoing / 
2025 Ref ActionRelevant 
Strategy / 
PlanLead Person / 
ServiceIndicator BaselineTarget (where 
applicable)Target 
dateUPDATE: AT DECEMBER 2020 NotesTracking of 
progress with 
actions
6.2gReinforce path networks alongside rivers 
by willow setting (a natural riverbank 
stabilisation technique with green 
network benefits for biodiversity)Core Paths 
PlanCountryside Team; 
volunteersUse this technique for 
core paths 
improvements / 
stabilisation wherever 
possibleAlready 
underwayContinue to use this 
technique for core 
paths improvements / 
stabilisation wherever 
possibleOngoing / 
2025Ongoing where feasible.
7.1aWork in partnership with our 
communities to support our communities 
towards becoming Net Zero Carbon, 
including enabling community initiatives 
for carbon cuts, sequestration and 
adaptation, and delivering improvements 
to the public realm in townsScottish 
Government’
s updated 
Climate 
Change Plan, 
once 
publishedSECCO; Strategy & 
Development; 
Connected 
Communities; 
partners including 
Scottish 
GovernmentTo be confirmed by  
Scottish Government’s 
updated Climate Change 
PlanTo be confirmed 
by  Scottish 
Government’s 
updated Climate 
Change PlanReduction in Carbon 
EmissionsAnnual Publication of the Scottish Government's Climate Change Plan 
Update delayed due to COVID (was initially expected April 2020; 
now anticipated December 2020). However work continues to 
support our communities to tackle climate change locally. COVID 
IMPACT
POSITIVE 
COVID 
IMPACTOngoing. We continue to progress delivering actions in our 
communities and take opportunities wherever we can. 
The Green Network Strategy has been adopted, and some 
actions have come forward in accordance with this, including 
the work on ClimatEvolution. The Green Network Strategy, 
having been adopted as Supplementary Planning Guidance, 
should be referred to by Development Management officers in 
deciding planning applications.  It was also intended that it 
would be used to support funding applications, however there 
has been insufficient officer time to pursue this. The next steps 
are to examine what any difficulties with implementation of 
the strategy, and how this can be addressed.
Ongoing. During COVID, some Rights of Way were twice the 
normal width due to levels of use increasing  - physical 
evidence of people walking 2 abreast. Path network has never 
been busier, e.g. 30 people seen out walking early on a Sunday 
morning during COVID lockdown. People discovered new paths 
around their local areas as were encouraged to stay local.
Pilot Journey Hub will be installed at Brunton Hall by March 
2021. This will bring together modes of sustainable transport 
and raise the profile of alternatives to private car use.
In the interests of encouraging sustainable travel patterns, the 
Council as Planning Authority imposes a planning condition on 
all major housing developments requiring that a Green Travel 
Plan be submitted to and approved by the Planning Authority 
prior to the occupation of any of the residential units. The 
Green Travel Plan shall have particular regard to provision for 
walking, cycling and public transport access to and within the 
site, and will include a timetable for its implementation, and 
details of how and when it will be distributed to all residents. Outcome 7: East Lothian’s Communities are places encouraging a Low Carbon Lifestyle and are prepared for the effects of Climate Change
Key Priority Area 1: Our Communities and Placemaking
7.1cEnsure that Core Path network, active 
travel network and wider path network 
are integrated and connect residential 
areas (including new developments) with 
settlement amenities, destinations, 
parks/open space, transport hubs; path 
networks in and around settlements 
should include shorter recreational 
circuits; paths should be constructed for 
climate resilience (e.g. porous surfaces)Core Paths 
Plan; LTS / 
ATIP; LDP; 
Developer 
Contribution
s FrameworkOutdoor Access; 
Countryside 
Service; Roads 
Services; Planning 
ServiceLength of Core Paths and 
length of promoted 
active travel routes; path 
and active travel 
connectivityCurrent length 
of Core Paths 
and length of 
promoted active 
travel routesIncreased length of 
paths & active travel 
routes; particularly in 
urban/semi-urban 
areas; increased path 
& active travel 
connectivityongoing7.1bImplement the Green Network Strategy 
to ensure connectivity, accessibility and 
enhancement of green spaces and green 
networks, including native tree planting / 
hedgerow planting in urban areas, wild 
spaces for nature, linked with blue 
networks and Sustainable Drainage 
SystemsGreen 
Networks 
Strategy SPG; 
LDP; Open 
Space 
Strategy 
(OSS)Sport, Countryside 
& Leisure; Planning 
Service; Strategy & 
DevelopmentGreenspace connectivity 
in our settlements and 
new developments; 
‘Quality of Urban 
Greenspace’ 
environmental indicator: 
Landscape Audit 
Management System 
(LAMS) scoreCurrent LAMS 
score for our 
urban 
greenspaces as 
per OSSAll settlements have 
connected green 
networks close to 
where people live; 
LAMS score increasingOngoing
7.1dEnsure connectivity of residential areas 
with local sustainable transport modes, 
including buses / bus stops, to reduce 
reliance on the car; maps of routes 
available to new residents to encourage 
active travel LTS Roads Services; 
Transport Services; 
Planning Service; 
Connected 
Communities / 
Area Partnerships 
and other partnersAs per LTS As per LTS As per LTS ongoing Ref ActionRelevant 
Strategy / PlanLead Person / 
ServiceIndicator BaselineTarget (where 
applicable)Target 
dateUPDATE: AT DECEMBER 2020 NotesTracking of 
progress with 
actions
7.1hSupport community initiatives such as 
cooking classes, community kitchens, food 
growing, community entertainment to 
reduce the need to travel and support 
vibrant and sustainable communitiesArea Plans Area Partnerships; 
Connected 
Communities  Food 
Friendly East 
Lothian network 
establishedCommunity initiatives 
supported by the CouncilNumber of  
community initiatives 
supported by the 
CouncilOngoing COVID has impacted on this work this year; i.e. classes 
paused and some now online. We will continue to include 
Climate Change in formal discussions with community 
groups and other voluntary groups within East Lothian 
where possible. The Resilient Communities seminar 
planned for October 2020 had to be cancelled due to 
COVID. COVID 
IMPACT
7.1iWork with partners to promote sustainability 
and reducing the carbon footprint of local 
sporting activities in our communitiesSports 
Development; 
partner 
organisationsNumber of sports clubs 
implementing 
‘sustainability 
statements’Increasing number of 
local sports clubs 
implement 
‘sustainability 
statements’Ongoing None - COVID impact. Session with teams to initiate work 
was postponed due to COVID and will be picked up as 
soon as possible.COVID 
IMPACT
7.1jAwareness-raising campaign aimed at home 
owners / occupiers to enhance garden 
ground to tackle climate change mitigation, 
adaptation and sequestration, and enhance 
biodiversity (including the planting of native 
trees / appropriate shrubs; provision of food 
growing space / fruit trees); encourage  
homeowners not to replace garden ground 
with hard-standing or artificial turfSECCO; partners Publicity campaign 
implementedNo publicity 
campaign in 
placePublicity campaign 
implemented to raise 
awareness2025 No update to report on awareness-raising campaign for 
homeowners - will be taken forward when possible. 
However, work continues to support our communities 
with this where possible.
COVID 
IMPACTCOVID 
IMPACT
COVID 
IMPACTActivities ongoing but impacted by COVID-19. Increased 
capital funding likely for these activities in towns, need to 
make the argument for supporting the rural economy 
also. Continue to work with community partners to 
support local initiatives. 
No update to report at this stage.No LAMS measurements since COVID; but work is still 
ongoing,
Not many Council-owned vacant sites. Food Growing 
Strategy group re-established.7.1eImplement the objectives of the Open Space 
Strategy to ensure Quality Open Space 
(amenity open space), which functions in 
climate change mitigation and adaptationOpen Space 
Strategy (OSS)Sport, Countryside 
& Leisure‘Quality of Urban 
Greenspace’ Landscape 
Audit Management 
System (LAMS) scoreAll amenity open 
space at 60% quality 
standard; all parks at 
70% quality standard; 
maintain and improve 
LAMS scoresongoing
7.1kWork with partners to take opportunities to 
improve water management, including 
rainwater harvesting and grey water 
harvesting, and creation and enhancement of 
blue infrastructure for both carbon off-
setting and natural flood managementLDP; SUDS 
Guidance; 
Green Network 
GuidanceAmenity Services; 
Planning Service; 
Sport, Countryside 
& LeisureDevelopment Proposals / 
Pre Application advice; 
open space 
enhancementLDP Delivery 
Programme, 
Open Space 
StrategyNumber of 
watercourses 
enhanced or SuDS 
implemented in an 
environmentally 
sympathetic manner20257.1fVacant or Derelict Sites: Encourage the local 
community to identify vacant or derelict sites 
and work in partnership to improve these to 
the benefit of the appearance of the local 
area, biodiversity and potentially community 
growing projectsLDP; Vacant and 
Derelict Land 
Survey; Open 
Space Strategy 
(OSS); Area 
PlansSport, Countryside 
& Leisure; 
Connected 
Communities; Area 
Partnerships; 
partners2025 / 
ongoing
7.1gSupport community led regeneration, 
including bringing empty properties back 
into use, to improve town centres and rural 
areas Local Housing 
Strategy (LHS)Housing Strategy; 
Economic 
Development2023 Ref ActionRelevant 
Strategy / PlanLead Person / 
ServiceIndicator BaselineTarget (where 
applicable)Target 
dateUPDATE: AT DECEMBER 2020 NotesTracking of 
progress with 
actions
7.2aEnforce Planning Condition for all relevant 
development proposals to report on the 
actions to be taken to reduce the Carbon 
Emissions from the build and from the 
completed development, including the 
provision of renewable technology and 
infrastructure for new car charging pointsPlanning 
ConditionPlanning 
Service; 
Building 
StandardsReports submitted on 
actions to reduce carbon 
emissions from new 
developmentsAll relevant 
development 
proposals to submit 
reports on the 
actions to be taken 
to reduce carbon 
emissions2020 The Planning Authority seeks to ensure that our carbon 
emission reduction condition is complied with and would 
consider whether it was expedient to take enforcement 
action should the condition not be complied with.
7.2eExplore Net Zero town of the future, 
including by pursuing low carbon heating 
from the groundwater heat source from our 
coalfields, and a Climate Resilient new town 
that is adapted for future climate change 
impactsCity Deal Development 
Planning; 
partners2025 Ongoing. We continue to explore options for Blindwells 
new town and our proposed 'ClimatEvolution Zone' with 
partners, including the feasibility of minewater geothermal 
heat sources in the former coalfields.The East Lothian Local Development Plan (LDP) was adopted 
in September 2018, and is ‘in-date’ until 2023. The Planning 
Policy and Strategy team is completing a work package on 
integrating climate change issues into the LDP. The next 
step will be the production of an Evidence Report, which 
will set out where we are now, and how we intend to take 
forward this work. Consultation will be carried out on the 
Evidence Report. In addition, we are currently exploring the 
feasbility of minewater geothermal heat options in our 
former coalfields; and we are exploring options to progress 
low/zero carbon heat and energy sources for housing.
Ongoing. The Planning Authority seeks to ensure that 
development proposals comply with relevant development 
plan policy and Supplementary Planning Guidance. 
Ongoing. The design guidance SPG is a material 
consideration in our determination of new proposals for 
housing development.LDP and 
Supplementary 
Planning 
Guidance;  
Green Network 
Strategy SPG; 
Design 
Standards for 
New Housing 
Areas SPG; 
Open Space 
StrategyPlanning 
Service; Sport, 
Countryside & 
LeisureAs per LDP policies and 
Supplementary Planning 
GuidanceAs per Local 
Development Plan 
policies and 
Supplementary 
Planning GuidanceAs per LDP policies 
and Supplementary 
Planning GuidanceOngoing 
to 2025
7.2dInclude key elements of Design Standards for 
New Housing Areas Supplementary Planning 
Guidance (SPG) and Green Network Strategy 
in next LDP. Until such time implement SPG 
in new development.LDP Planning 
ServiceDesign Standards for 
New Housing Areas SPG 
prepared and 
implementedDraft produced in 
2018/19Design Standards for 
New Housing Areas 
SPG implemented2020Key Priority Area 2: Planning for New Developments
7.2bProgress embedding the Just Transition to 
Net Zero into the planning process through 
our next Local Development Plan for 
example by pursuing low carbon heating 
from the groundwater heat source from our 
coalfields, and Climate Resilient new 
developments adapted for future climate 
change impactsNext LDP; 
National 
Planning 
FrameworkPlanning 
Service; 
national 
partnersJust Transition to Net 
Zero is being embedded 
into next LDPProgress embedding 
Just Transition to 
Net Zero into next 
LDP2025
7.2cImplement the Local Development Plan 
policies and Supplementary Planning 
Guidance on Green Networks, Sustainable 
Drainage Systems (SuDS), open space, 
allotments, active travel and sustainable 
transport connectivity in new developments, 
Travel Plans for residential and non-
residential developments, green corridors 
for people and wildlife; encourage 
developers to facilitate the restoration of 
degraded watercourses, where possible Ref ActionRelevant 
Strategy / PlanLead Person / 
ServiceIndicator BaselineTarget (where 
applicable)Target 
dateUPDATE: AT DECEMBER 2020 NotesTracking of 
progress with 
actions
POSITIVE 
COVID 
IMPACT
COVID 
IMPACTThis will follow implementation of Food Growing Strategy. New 
Fareshare Food HUB established, now based in Prestonpans. Local 
emergency food distribution took place, co-ordinated via local 
Community Resilience Bases, during COVID, funding provided by 
Scottish Government.Many groups doing community growing projects (existing/ongoing 
but also new ones during COVID), e.g. Roots & Shoots project at 
Ormiston. Amenity Services are working to support developing new 
community growing spaces e.g. in Prestonpans.This will be considered through both the review of the LDP (the 
climate change work package) and also the Forestry Strategy. Work 
leading up to the production of the Evidence Report (expected 
2021) will look at how development can be made as low carbon as 
possible, and how residual emissions are treated, including planting 
of native woodland. The Forestry Strategy will identify where such 
planting is appropriate. Issues to explore include finding suitable 
land; making sure emissions reduction is genuinely additional; 
whether the policy meets the ‘reasonableness’ test given other 
carbon offset schemes are possible; how to make sure lack of 
available land would not constrain otherwise beneficial 
development, or push development into a less sustainable pattern 
by decreasing density or increasing distances travelled. Room for 
manoeuvre may be constrained by national policy.
This will be considered in due course through the LDP process.
Food Growing Strategy group re-established; currently exploring 
options for progressing Local Food Growing Strategy. 
Local food growing initiatives are supported in our communities by 
the Area Partnerships, and community-led initiatives are underway 
across some communities.
Ongoing - supported and encouraged by Amenity Services. Orchards 
being progressed with community groups e.g. at Lewisvale Park, 
Musselburgh, and in Prestonpans.7.2fExplore the opportunity to include a policy 
requirement for  developments to plant 
native woodland to mitigate against climate 
change and off-set emissionsNext LDP Planning 
Service;  Sport, 
Countryside & 
Leisure; 
national 
partnersWork to inform new 
policy development2025
7.3dWork with partners to investigate 
opportunities for implementing a 
distribution network for surplus food 
growing productionAmenity 
Services; local 
partnersProgressing 
opportunitiesProgressing 
opportunities for 
food distribution 
network20257.2gEvaluate our next LDP with a view to 
achieving the Net Zero Carbon emissions 
target by assessing development location in 
relation to transport, preventing loss of trees 
and topsoil areas, and woodland planting 
proposals linked to developmentNext LDP Planning 
Service; 
partnersEvaluation process 
progressing2025
Key Priority Area 3: Local Food Growing
7.3aPrepare and implement a Local Food Growing 
Strategy for East Lothian, to ensure that 
allotment sites in East Lothian are of a 
sufficient quantity and quality to meet the 
needs and aspirations of local residents, 
including in new developments; support and 
promote local food growing initiativesAmenity 
ServicesPreparation of Local Food 
Growing StrategyLocal Food 
Growing Strategy 
implemented2022
7.3bPlant and manage community orchards / 
community fruit growing in partnership with 
communities; including planting apple trees 
alongside core paths – ‘Apple Core Paths’ – 
for community benefitLocal Food 
Growing 
Strategy (in 
prep); Area 
PlansSport, 
Countryside & 
Leisure; Area 
Partnerships; 
communitiesNumber of apple trees / 
fruit trees planted and 
managedIncreased number 
of apple trees / 
fruit trees planted 
and managed2025
7.3cInvestigate options for working in 
partnership with our communities to bring 
areas of suitable urban land into use for local 
food growing, including private gardens and 
vacant landLocal Food 
Growing 
Strategy (in 
prep)Sport, 
Countryside & 
Leisure; Area 
Partnerships; 
communitiesProgressing options Progressing 
options to bring 
areas of suitable 
urban land into 
use for local food 
growing2025 Ref ActionRelevant 
Strategy / 
PlanLead Person / 
ServiceIndicator BaselineTarget (where 
applicable)Target 
dateUPDATE: AT DECEMBER 2020 NotesTracking of 
progress with 
actions
COVID 
IMPACTClimate Change Officer has had ongoing discussions with community 
representatives, including representatives of local sustainability 
organisations, Area Partnerships, Resilient Communities / Community 
Councils, young people through the East Lothian Youth Council and 
schools, local businesses and landowner/ land manager 
representatives. COVID has impacted on the timescales for this 
however options are being considered through the Climate Change 
Planning & Monitoring Group. The Planning Service has undertaken 
training which will improve their engagement with communities over 
the climate change issues relevant to the forthcoming Local 
Development Plan, which has the potential to significantly affect 
climate emissions from the built environment for years to come.Revise 
target 
date to 
2021
COVID 
IMPACT
COVID 
IMPACTCOVID has impacted on the production of a formal Communications 
Plan, and Climate Change messaging had to be handled sensitively in 
relation to prioritising COVID messaging during the pandemic. However, 
the Climate Change Officer continues to liaise almost weekly with the 
Corporate Communications team over appropriate publicity and 
promotion around Climate Change. Appropriate social media messaging 
was released each day of 'Climate Week' in September 2020, and 
Corporate Communications ensures that news releases relevant to the 
climate change agenda reference the Climate Change Strategy.
Development of the Charter has been put on hold due to the COVID 
pandemic.  It will be re-prioritised as part of the work of the 
Communities Recovery and Renewal Group.
Ongoing. We continue to support and promote national climate change 
messaging and campaigns, as appropriate. The Council participated in 
'Climate Week' in September 2020, with appropriate social media 
messaging released each day. The 'Climate Change and Sustainability' 
page of ELC's website includes website links to relevant external 
organisations and partner agencies including the Scottish Government’s 
‘Net Zero Nation’ and ‘Greener Scotland’ websites, and Zero Waste 
Scotland’s Energy Efficiency Business Support website. The 'Fuel Billing 
advice - Energy Efficiency' page of ELC's website includes links to 
external partner organisations including Home Energy Scotland and the 
East Lothian Energy Advice Service.
Several Area Partnerships have already incorporated actions to tackle 
climate change in their local Area Plans. Climate Change Officer has had 
ongoing discussions with community representatives, including 
representatives of local sustainability organisations, Area Partnerships, 
Resilient Communities / Community Councils, and young people 
through the East Lothian Youth Council and schools.Revise 
target 
date to 
2021
Revise 
target 
date to 
2021Develop an East Lothian Climate Change 
Charter, setting out what the Council will 
do and what communities / individuals can 
do to tackle climate change and reduce 
emissionsSECCO; Corporate 
Policy & 
ImprovementProduction of  East 
Lothian Climate 
Change CharterPublication of  
East Lothian 
Climate Change 
Charter2020 Currently 
promoting 
the #make a 
difference 
theme
7.4dSupport and help to promote national 
campaigns, including the Scottish 
Government’s ‘Greener Scotland’ 
campaign, to consider the carbon footprint 
of our everyday lifestyle and behaviour 
choicesSECCO; Corporate 
Communications; 
partnersParticipation in 
national 
promotional 
campaigns; social 
media engagementCurrently 
participate in 
Scotland’s 
Climate 
Week, Earth 
Hour etcKey Priority Area 4: Awareness Raising and Engagement
Ongoing 
to 20257.4aExplore options to identify how best to 
engage and ensure representation across 
all sectors of East Lothian’s community, to 
involve our communities in the local 
planning of our Climate Emergency 
Response (e.g. Citizens’ Assembly; Climate 
Change Forum / Network)CCPMG; SECCO; 
external partnersOptions appraisal 
involving all sectors 
of East Lothian’s 
communityAppropriate 
citizens’ 
engagement 
forum is 
established and 
functioning2020
7.4bProduce a Communications Plan setting out 
our awareness-raising and engagement 
proposalsSECCO;  Corporate 
CommunicationsProduction of 
Communications 
PlanCommunications 
Plan produced 
and 
implemented2020
7.4c
Participation in 
national 
promotional 
campaigns; 
social media 
engagementOngoing 
to 2025
7.4eWork in partnership with Community 
Councils, Area Partnerships, TRAs and 
other local groups and organisations to 
encourage and assist all areas of East 
Lothian to become involved in taking 
forward sustainability and promoting a low 
carbon lifestyle in their local areaArea Plans; 
Community 
Council 
plans etcSECCO; Strategy & 
Development; 
Connected 
Communities / Area 
Partnerships and 
other partners; 
Corporate Policy & 
ImprovementActions 
incorporated into 
Area Plans and 
other community 
plansSeveral Area 
Plans already 
include 
actions to 
tackle climate 
changeAll Area Plans 
and other 
community 
plans include 
sustainability / 
plans to tackle 
climate change Ref ActionRelevant 
Strategy / 
PlanLead Person / 
ServiceIndicator BaselineTarget (where 
applicable)Target 
dateUPDATE: AT DECEMBER 2020 NotesTracking of 
progress with 
actions
COVID 
IMPACT
COVID 
IMPACTThis has been impacted by COVID, however the Climate Change Planning & 
Monitoring Group continues to take opportunities to liaise with 
communities, residents, businesses and other stakeholders and partners to 
share and promote best practice.
The Climate Change Officer continues to liaise with residents, communities, 
local organisations, schools and businesses as appropriate.
Linked to the affordable tariff ‘East Lothian Energy’, People's Energy 
Company wish to issue a welcome pack to new customers with energy 
efficiency advice. 
Disrupted by COVID. No formal events allowed during COVID. However, 
anecdotally, during COVID our parks are the busiest they have ever been. 
People having picnics in parks where they never did before.COVID 
IMPACT
COVID 
IMPACTThe setting up of a 'Green Champions' network has been delayed due to 
COVID, however, the Climate Change Officer continues to liaise with many 
local people/groups/organisations who are already committed to and 
underway with taking forward this work in their local communities.
Delayed due to COVID. Options are being considered to take this forward. 
Currently the 'Climate Change and Sustainability' page of ELC's website 
includes website links to relevant external organisations and partner 
agencies including the Scottish Government’s ‘Net Zero Nation’ and ‘Greener 
Scotland’ websites, Zero Waste Scotland’s Energy Efficiency Business Support 
website, and Adaptation Scotland's website. The 'Fuel Billing advice - Energy 
Efficiency' page of ELC's website includes links to external partner 
organisations including Home Energy Scotland and the East Lothian Energy 
Advice Service.
The #makeadifference campaign has been paused due to COVID. However, 
this action is ongoing. Appropriate publicity and promotion around Climate 
Change continues. Appropriate social media messaging was released each 
day of 'Climate Week' in September 2020, and Corporate Communications 
ensures that news releases relevant to the climate change agenda reference 
the Climate Change Strategy. We continue to support and promote national 
climate change messaging and campaigns, as appropriate. The 'Climate 
Change and Sustainability' landing page of ELC's website includes website 
links to relevant external organisations and partner agencies including the 
Scottish Government’s ‘Net Zero Nation’ and ‘Greener Scotland’ websites, 
and Zero Waste Scotland’s Energy Efficiency Business Support website.Revise 
target 
date to 
2021
COVID 
IMPACT7.4fSet up a network of ‘Green Champions’ 
in our communities to help promote 
sustainability, raise awareness and 
encourage engagement with the move 
to a low carbon lifestyleSECCO; Waste 
Services; 
CCPMG; 
community 
partnersNetwork of 
community 
‘Green 
Champions’ set 
upMany local 
groups etc 
already taking 
this agenda 
forwardNetwork of 
community 
‘Green 
Champions’ set 
up2021
7.4gSet up a dedicated page on the Council’s 
website to function as a central 
information point for directing people to 
information on the transition to a low 
carbon lifestyle and a Net Zero East 
Lothian; increase awareness of the 
impacts of climate change  and what 
individuals / homeowners / employers 
can do to adaptClimate 
Change 
Strategy; 
Resilient 
Communities 
initiativeSECCO; 
Corporate 
Communications
; partnersCentral 
information point 
set up on 
Council’s website2020
Increasing levels 
of awarenessOngoing 
to 2025
7.4jCommunity Events, Education and 
Training Programme: Continue to 
support the use of greenspaces and 
community meeting places by local 
groups and organisations for holding 
appropriate local events and activities, 
promote opportunities to encourage a 
sustainable lifestyle, undertake 
education and awareness-raising 
activities and training.Open Space 
Strategy (OSS)Sport, 
Countryside & 
Leisure; partnersNumber of local 
events, training 
and initiatives; 
number of 
participants at 
events / trainingIncreased 
number of local 
events, training 
and initiatives; 
increased 
number of 
participants at 
events / trainingOngoing 
to 20257.4hUndertake an awareness raising 
campaign to promote tackling climate 
change, reducing emissions and how 
everyone can #makeadifference; 
including information provision and 
promoting behaviour changeSECCO; 
Corporate 
CommunicationsAwareness levels 
measured via 
Scottish 
Household 
Survey74% of adults 
in 2018Increasing levels 
of awarenessOngoing 
to 2025
7.4iWork with partners to provide 
information, training and support for 
residents, communities and businesses 
and share best practice to help inspire 
action across the countyCCPMG; SECCO; 
external 
partnersAwareness levels 
measured via 
Residents’ 
Survey74% of adults 
in 2018Central 
information 
point set up on 
Council’s 
websiteClimate 
change 
information & 
links 
currently on 
Council 
website Ref ActionRelevant 
Strategy / 
PlanLead Person / Service Indicator BaselineTarget (where 
applicable)Target 
dateUPDATE: AT DECEMBER 2020 NotesTracking of 
progress with 
actions
Connected 
Communities 
added as owner 
of this action
Connected 
Communities 
added as owner 
of this action
Connected 
Communities 
added as owner 
of this actionCOVID 
IMPACT
COVID 
IMPACT
COVID 
IMPACT
COVID 
IMPACTResilient 
Communities 
networkProtective Services; 
Emergency Planning, 
Risk & Resilience 
Team; Connected 
CommunitiesProportion of 
Community Councils 
with local Community 
Resilience Plans 
(currently 40% in 
2018/19)10% 
(2016/17)75% (2022) 2022 COVID-19 continues to result in greater integration between ELC and 
local Resilient Community groups. The Connected Communities 
service is now responsible for supporting Community Councils as well 
as Area Partnerships.  All 20 Community Councils now have a Resilient 
Community group with a Single Point of Contact (SPoC) and deputy 
who remain in regular communication with ELC. 55% of Community 
Councils now have written plans. 
Resilient 
Communities 
networkClimate Change 
Adaptation 
network is set up 
for East Lothian7.4kCommunity Involvement: 
Encourage and support the 
formation of local volunteer groups, 
such as “friends of” or “in bloom” 
groups to support the enhancement 
of specific open spaceOpen Space 
Strategy 
(OSS); 
Countryside 
Site 
Management 
PlansSport, Countryside & 
Leisure; local groups; 
partnersLocal volunteer 
groups, such as 
“friends of” or “in 
bloom” groups 
underwayAs per OSS 
and  
Countryside 
Site 
Management 
PlansLocal volunteer 
groups, such as 
“friends of” or “in 
bloom” groups 
underway and 
supported; as per 
OSSOngoing 
to 2025
Key Priority Area 5: Climate Adaptation: Climate Ready Communities
7.5bSet up a Climate Change Adaptation 
network for East Lothian, based 
upon the Resilient Communities 
network already establishedClimate 
Change 
Strategy; 
Resilient 
Communities 
networkSECCO; Protective 
Services; Emergency 
Planning, Risk & 
Resilience Team; 
Connected 
Communities / Area 
Partnerships and 
other community 
partnersEstablishment of a 
Climate Change 
Adaptation network 
for East Lothian
Climate Ready 
Response Plans in 
place for all 
communities20222021Disrupted by COVID.
COVID-19 has impacted on the plans to develop a Climate Resilient 
Communities Network for East Lothian, due to the existing Resilient 
Communities network and Community Councils undertaking 
significant community support and resilience work during COVID. This 
will be progressed again when the time is right.
As above (7.5b): COVID-19 has impacted on the plans to develop a 
Climate Resilient Communities Network for East Lothian, due to the 
existing Resilient Communities network and Community Councils 
undertaking significant community support and resilience work during 
COVID. This will be progressed again when the time is right.
As above (7.5b): COVID-19 has impacted on the plans to develop a 
Climate Resilient Communities Network for East Lothian, due to the 
existing Resilient Communities network and Community Councils 
undertaking significant community support and resilience work during 
COVID. This will be progressed again when the time is right.
COVID has impacted on this work this year. We will continue to 
include Climate Change in formal discussions with Resilient 
Communities and other voluntary groups within East Lothian where 
possible. The Resilient Communities seminar planned for October 
2020 was cancelled due to COVID. A virtual event on support for 
volunteering is planned for January 2021.COVID 
IMPACT
7.5aIncrease community and individual 
resilience
7.5eRaise awareness and understanding 
of climate change impacts among 
East Lothian’s communities, and 
improve capacity to respond to 
climate risks; work in partnership 
with local employers, landowners, 
voluntary groups, and community 
planning partners including 
Emergency RespondersClimate 
Change 
Strategy; 
Severe 
Weather 
Response 
PlanSECCO; Connected 
Communities; 
partners including 
Adaptation Scotland, 
community planning 
partnersClimate Adaptation 
awareness-raising 
campaign / promotion; 
awareness levels 
among local 
population (measured 
in Residents’ Survey)Climate 
Adaptation 
awareness-raising 
campaign / 
promotion in 
place; awareness 
levels increasing 
among local 
population 
(measured in 
Residents’ Survey)Ongoing 
to 20257.5cCommunity Councils will be 
encouraged to elect Single Points of 
Contact (SPoCs) for Climate Change 
AdaptationSECCO; Protective 
Services; Emergency 
Planning, Risk & 
Resilience Team;  
Connected 
Communities / Area 
Partnerships and 
othersSingle Points of 
Contact (SPoCs) 
identified for Climate 
Change AdaptationEvery Community 
Council has a 
Single Point of 
Contact (SPoC) for 
Climate Change 
Adaptation2021
7.5dWork in partnership to support and 
assist our communities to prepare 
Climate Ready Response Plans for 
their areaSECCO; Connected 
Communities; 
Protective Services; 
Emergency Planning, 
Risk & Resilience 
TeamClimate Ready 
Response Plans in 
place for communitiesCommunity 
Resilience 
Plans already 
in place in 
several 
communities 
 
 
 Ref ActionRelevant 
Strategy / 
PlanLead Person / Service Indicator BaselineTarget (where 
applicable)Target 
dateUPDATE: AT DECEMBER 2020 NotesTracking of 
progress with 
actions
7.5fProgress the Musselburgh Flood 
Protection SchemeFlood Risk 
Management 
StrategyStructures & Flooding 
Team; national & 
local partnersProgress 
implementation of 
Musselburgh Flood 
Protection SchemeMusselburgh Flood Protection Scheme Stage 4 - Outline Design 
progressing.
The Haddington Study has been extended to consider Natural Flood 
Management in the Tyne Catchment. 7.5gProgress the Haddington Flood 
Protection SchemeFlood Risk 
Management 
StrategyStructures & Flooding 
Team; national & 
local partnersProgress 
implementation of 
Haddington Flood 
Protection SchemeHaddington Flood 
Protection 
Scheme is 
progressedOngoing 
to 2025Musselburgh 
Flood Protection 
Scheme is 
progressedOngoing 
to 2025Appendix 2 : Amended actions in the Climate Change Strategy Action Plan, for approval  
Proposed new actions to add into the Action Plan: 
 Ref ActionRelevant 
Strategy / PlanLead Person / 
ServiceIndicator Baseline Target (where applicable)Target 
dateUPDATE: AT DECEMBER 2020 Notes
1.5c Reduction in ELC's paper use 
(printing) - 'going paperless'Working 
Differently 
benefitsCCPMG Reduction in 
printer paper order 
quantities73% reduction in paper 2022 Reduction in paper quantity for printing seen 
during COVID due to new ways of workingSeeking Cabinet 
approval to include 
this new action
3.1j Improve knowledge and 
understanding of private housing 
stock, i.e. condition, fuel poverty, 
energy efficiency , to help 
understand those properties that 
are failing to meet the Scottish 
Government's EPC target and help 
facilitate Scottish Government 
funding to those who are eligible 
for energy efficiency measuresStrategy & 
DevelopmentNumber of private 
properties with 
energy efficiency 
dataAll assets to be surveyed 
and validated through 
systems such as Home 
Analytics and physical 
surveysAnnual An annual programme of assessing stock is 
currently taking place, although opportunities 
are being explored to change the Scottish 
Government's annual programme to a 3 year 
programme which should help to accelerate. 
COVID resulted in a postive impact as officers 
used the time while the construction sector 
was closed to identify potential properties 
through existing databases and drive-bys.Seeking Cabinet 
approval to include 
this new action
3.1k Review and update the Council's 
affordable housing specification 
and design guide to ensure all 
future developments are low 
carbon and sustainableStrategy & 
DevelopmentTo review and update the 
Affordable Housing 
specification and design 
guide by March 20222022 Team Manager vacancy within the structure has 
resulted in delays. Post should be filled by 
April 2021.Seeking Cabinet 
approval to include 
this new action
3.2f Ensure all new build affordable 
housing delivered directly by the 
Council is as sustainable and low 
carbon as possibleStrategy & 
DevelopmentNumber of new 
build delivering 
renewable 
technologyAll affordable new build 
projects as a minimum 
must meet the Scottish 
Government's Greener 
Standard and beyond 
where possibleOngoing All New Build projects delivered in the last year 
have met the Scottish Government Greener 
Standards criteria. In addition to this, the 
Council is delivering air source heat pumps 
instead of gas at two sites in Tranent and is 
exploring a ParkPower opportunity at a site in 
Wallyford which has potential to attract 
additional funding. Further research is also 
being undertaken to explore geothermal and 
district heating at Blindwells.Seeking Cabinet 
approval to include 
this new action
4.1h Continue to reduce the Carbon 
Impact of household waste 
generated and managed for East 
LothianWaste 
ManagementWaste 
ServicesCarbon Impact of 
household waste 
generated and 
managed for East 
Lothian (tCO2e) - 
from SEPA national 
dataIn 2018: 110,686 
tCO2e.
Carbon Impact 
per tonne of 
household 
waste managed 
in 2018: 2.21.Continued reduction in 
Carbon Impact per tonne 
of household waste 
managed (from SEPA 
data)2025 In 2019: 106,233 tCO2e (i.e. a reduction of 4,453 
tCO2e since 2018).
Carbon Impact per tonne of household waste 
managed in 2019: 2.13.Seeking Cabinet 
approval to include 
this new actionAddition of baseline to action: 
 
Slight amendment to wording of baseline of action for clarification: 
 
Slight amendment to wording of action for clarification:  
 
Proposed deletion of action from Action Plan: 
 Ref ActionRelevant 
Strategy / PlanLead Person / 
ServiceIndicator Baseline Target (where applicable)Target 
dateUPDATE: AT DECEMBER 2020 Notes
Engagement 
with Outdoor 
Learning within 
school day: 
Primary 47% 
Secondary 100% 
(not including 
P7 camp)Climate Change Strategy 
objectives embedded 
into ‘Learning for 
Sustainability’ element of 
school curriculum2020 There is now a greater emphasis in schools on 
learning outdoors as a response to COVID 
mitigations and many schools are linking this to 
the theme of sustainability in a cross curricular 
way (literacy / numeracy).Baseline added 1.8b Embed the objectives of this 
Climate Change Strategy with the 
‘Learning for Sustainability’ (LfS) 
agenda as part of Curriculum for 
Excellence (CfE).  LfS is delivered 
through outdoor learning, global 
citizenship and sustainable 
developmentLfS Vision 2030 
as part of   
Curriculum for 
ExcellenceEducation; 
Outdoor 
Learning; 
national 
education 
partnersClimate Change 
Strategy objectives 
embedded into 
‘Learning for 
Sustainability’ 
element of school 
curriculum
Levels of 
participation in the 
'Eco-Schools' 
programme in East 
Lothian schools; 
eco-projects 
delivered in 
schoolsIn East Lothian 
currently 8 ELC 
schools have 
Green Flags 
(according to 
Keep Scotland 
Beautiful 
website)Increased levels of 
participation in the 'Eco-
Schools' programme in 
East Lothian schools; 
more Green Flag Awards; 
more eco-projects 
delivered in schoolsAnnual Schools' engagement in the Eco-Schools 
programme is promoted and encouraged with 
awareness raising opportunities being 
highlighted throughout the school year as 
information becomes available.Slight amendment 
to baseline to 
clarify 'ELC' schools1.8c Support and expand the 'Eco-
Schools' programme in East Lothian 
schools – potentially with greater 
input from other agencies and 
organisations / a county wide 
programme to support schools and 
teachers with delivery of projectsCurriculum for 
ExcellenceEducation; 
ELC 
Countryside 
Ranger 
Service; 
external 
partners 
including 
K 
Amended action to 
delete 
"Bikeability" and 
replace with "adult 
cycle training".2.2h Support Bikeability  adult  cycle 
training for adults throughout the 
countyOutdoor 
Learning; 
Roads 
ServicesNumber of 
Bikeability  adult 
cycle  training 
sessions for adults 
and number of 
participantsNone at present Increased numbers of 
Bikeability  training 
sessions and participants2023 Essential Cycling Skills: Instructors available 
through Outdoor Learning.
5.1e Maximise the key assets in East 
Lothian to support sector 
development and local 
employment, including City Deal-
funded project at Queen Margaret 
University (QMU); heritage assets 
such as John Muir in support of 
tourism, etc.EDS Economic 
Development 
& Strategic 
Investment; 
partners 
including 
QMUAs per EDS As per EDS As per EDS; linkages with Visit 
East Lothian channels; City Deal-
funded project at QMU: business 
case being developed, including 
measures, outcomes etc. 
Ongoing promotion of JMW and 
other initiatives via Visit East 
Lothian channels, measured 
through visitor / impact surveys.2025 DELETE ACTION: this is an Economic 
Development Strategy action, not 
specifically a Climate Change action.Seeking Cabinet 
approval to delete 
this actionProposal to combine actions 6.2b and 6.2e into one action due to duplication:  
 
Proposed revised action 6.2b: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ref ActionRelevant 
Strategy / PlanLead Person / 
ServiceIndicator Baseline Target (where applicable)Target 
dateUPDATE: AT DECEMBER 2020 Notes
Natural river flood 
protection measures2025 Seeking Cabinet 
approval to 
combine this 
action with Action 
6.2b then delete 
this actionCOMBINE WITH ACTION 6.2b6.2b Work with landowners to create 
connected blue networks and 
natural flood management, 
including marshland habitat 
creation and Sustainable Drainage 
System opportunitiesFlood Risk 
Management 
Strategy; 
Green 
Networks 
StrategyStructures & 
Flooding 
Team; 
Countryside 
Service; 
landownersOpportunities are 
taken to work with 
landowners to 
improve blue 
networks and 
natural flood 
management
6.2e Progress natural river flood 
protection measures / floodwater 
storage by improving natural 
riverine habitats, including 
freshwater marshland and 
wetlandsFlood 
Protection 
studiesStructures / 
Flooding; 
Countryside 
ServiceProgression of 
natural river flood 
protection 
measuresPreliminary 
studies 
underwayAs per Flood 
Risk 
Management 
StrategyIncreased blue network 
connectivity and areas of 
natural flood 
management identified2025 To be considered in Flood Studies identified in 
Local Flood Risk Management Plan.Seeking Cabinet 
approval to 
combine this 
action with Action 
6.2e (see proposed 
revised action 6.2b 
below)
As per Flood 
Risk 
Management 
Strategy; 
preliminary 
studies 
underwayIncreased blue network 
connectivity and areas of 
natural flood 
management identified; 
natural river flood 
protection measures and 
habitat improvements 
progressing2025 To be considered in Flood Studies identified in 
Local Flood Risk Management Plan.ACTION NOW 
COMBINED WITH 
ACTION 6.2E - 
seeking Cabinet 
approval for this6.2b Work with landowners to create 
connected blue networks and 
progress natural flood 
management, natural river flood 
protection measures / floodwater 
storage by improving and creating 
natural riverine habitats, including 
freshwater marshland, wetlands 
and Sustainable Drainage System 
opportunitiesFlood Risk 
Management 
Strategy; Flood 
Protection 
studies; Green 
Networks 
StrategyStructures & 
Flooding 
Team; 
Countryside 
Service; 
landownersOpportunities are 
taken to work with 
landowners to 
improve blue 
networks and 
natural flood 
management; 
Progression of 
natural river flood 
protection 
measuresProposed revisions to the 2020 target  dates of the following actions due to COVID related impacts:  
 Ref ActionRelevant 
Strategy / PlanLead Person / 
ServiceIndicator BaselineTarget (where 
applicable)Target 
dateUPDATE: AT DECEMBER 2020 Notes
1.5a Facilities Management 
Services will aim to eliminate 
problematic or unnecessary 
single-use plastics by the end 
of 2020 as part of the UK 
Plastics PactUK Plastics 
Pact; Facilities 
Management 
targetsFacilities 
Management 
ServiceElimination of 
specific  single-
use plasticsSpecific single-use 
plastics eliminated 
by end of 20202020 Due to impacts of COVID need to revise target date to the end 
of 2021, pending service needs and COVID. Due to COVID 
there has been an unfortunate increase in the use of single 
use plastics in 2020. School pupils are encouraged to bring 
refillable bottles from home however this is not always 
possible; there has been an increase in the use of disposables 
for school lunches. COVID related PPE cleaning materials, 
chemicals in bottles, hand sanitiser etc. have all added to the 
increased use.
When it is safe and practical to look at reducing single use 
plastics Facilities Management Service will take this forward.
The council remains committed to tackling 
unnecessary/problematic single-use plastics use.Revise target date 
to 2021
1.6b Implement an Ultra-Low 
Emissions Vehicles (ULEV) 
strategy for our Council 
vehicle fleetULEV Strategy Transport 
ServicesULEV Strategy 
implementedULEV Strategy 
implemented2020 Due to impacts of COVID need to revise target date to the end 
of 2021, pending service needs and COVID. Work continues to 
develop a ULEV Strategy and we continue to expand our ULEV 
fleet (see 1.6a).Revise target date 
to 2021
1.7b Produce and implement a new 
community benefits in 
procurement procedure, set 
out in an updated Community 
Benefits StrategyCommunity 
Benefits 
StrategyProcurement 
TeamProduction of an 
updated 
Community 
Benefits StrategyProduction, adoption 
and implementation 
of an updated 
Community Benefits 
Strategy2020 Following the approval of ELC's Sustainable Procurement 
Policy by Cabinet in November 2020, it is now the intention to 
bring forward for approval guidance documents, specifically 
Sustainable Procurement Guidance and Procurement 
Community Benefits Strategy. Work is ongoing to develop 
and produce these documents.Revise target date 
to 2021
Revise target date 
to 2021Outcomes 
under East 
Lothian Plan 
2017–2027Key targets within 
the Council Plan2020 Revised timescale for this is not yet known as it will depend 
on the length of time we are in the COVID emergency. We are 
unable to review the Plans until we know the full extent of 
the impact of COVID-19. The Strategic Needs Assessment is 
being revised (by end of 2020) and this will provide the basis 
for review of Council Plan and East Lothian Plan (Local 
Outcomes Improvement Plan).Revise target date 
to 20211.1b Embed our aims to tackle the 
Climate Emergency and to 
achieve emission reductions 
within our Council Plan and 
Local Outcome Improvement 
Plan (East Lothian Plan)Council Plan; 
East Lothian 
PlanPolicy Team; 
SECCOCouncil Plan and 
Local Outcome 
Improvement 
Plan (East Lothian 
Plan)
3.3a Increase the awareness of the 
impacts of climate change  and 
what individuals / 
homeowners / employers can 
do to adapt, by setting up a 
website central hub linking to 
information from ELC and 
relevant partner agenciesClimate 
Change 
Strategy; 
Resilient 
Communities 
initiativeSECCO; Strategy 
& Development; 
Web Team; 
external 
partners 
including 
Adaptation 
ScotlandWebsite Hub set 
up; number of 
‘hits’ on websiteNone at 
present 
specifically for 
East LothianWebsite Hub set up; 
number of ‘hits’ on 
website increasing2020 Website hub still to be progressed. However, the 'Climate 
Change and Sustainability' landing page of ELC's website 
includes website links to relevant external organisations and 
partner agencies including Adaptation Scotland.Proposed revisions to the 2020 target dates of the following actions due to COVID related impacts  (continued) : 
 Ref ActionRelevant 
Strategy / PlanLead Person / 
ServiceIndicator Baseline Target (where applicable)Target 
dateUPDATE: AT DECEMBER 2020 Notes
6.1m The Council’s Countryside Ranger 
Service to interpret / educate / 
raise awareness of climate change 
mitigation, adaptation and 
sequestration as part of their 
remitELC 
Countryside 
Ranger Service 
Roles and 
RemitELC Countryside 
Ranger ServiceInclusion and 
implementation of  
interpretation / education 
/ awareness-raising about 
climate change mitigation, 
adaptation and 
sequestration in ELCRS 
remitCurrently 
undertaken as 
required / 
when 
opportunities 
ariseInclusion of  interpretation 
/ education / awareness-
raising about climate 
change mitigation, 
adaptation and 
sequestration in ELCRS 
remit and being 
implemented2020 Disrupted by COVID this year. Revise 
target date 
to 2021
Revise 
target date 
to 2021Currently 
promoting the 
#make a 
difference 
themePublication of  East Lothian 
Climate Change Charter2020 Development of the Charter has been put on hold due to the COVID 
pandemic.  It will be re-prioritised as part of the work of the 
Communities Recovery and Renewal Group.Revise 
target date 
to 20217.4c Develop an East Lothian Climate 
Change Charter, setting out what 
the Council will do and what 
communities / individuals can do 
to tackle climate change and 
reduce emissionsSECCO; Corporate 
Policy & 
ImprovementProduction of  East Lothian 
Climate Change Charter
7.4g Set up a dedicated page on the 
Council’s website to function as a 
central information point for 
directing people to information 
on the transition to a low carbon 
lifestyle and a Net Zero East 
Lothian; increase awareness of 
the impacts of climate change  and 
what individuals / homeowners / 
employers can do to adaptClimate 
Change 
Strategy; 
Resilient 
Communities 
initiativeSECCO; Corporate 
Communications; 
partnersCentral information point 
set up on Council’s 
websiteClimate 
change 
information & 
links currently 
on Council 
websiteCentral information point 
set up on Council’s 
website2020 Delayed due to COVID. Options are being considered to take this 
forward. Currently the 'Climate Change and Sustainability' page of 
ELC's website includes website links to relevant external organisations 
and partner agencies including the Scottish Government’s ‘Net Zero 
Nation’ and ‘Greener Scotland’ websites, Zero Waste Scotland’s Energy 
Efficiency Business Support website, and Adaptation Scotland's 
website. The 'Fuel Billing advice - Energy Efficiency' page of ELC's 
website includes links to external partner organisations including 
Home Energy Scotland and the East Lothian Energy Advice Service.Revise 
target date 
to 2021Appropriate citizens’ 
engagement forum is 
established and 
functioning2020 Climate Change Officer has had ongoing discussions with community 
representatives, including representatives of local sustainability 
organisations, Area Partnerships, Resilient Communities / Community 
Councils, young people through the East Lothian Youth Council and 
schools, local businesses and landowner/ land manager 
representatives. COVID has impacted on the timescales for this 
however options are being considered through the Climate Change 
Planning & Monitoring Group. The Planning Service has undertaken 
training which will improve their engagement with communities over 
the climate change issues relevant to the forthcoming Local 
Development Plan, which has the potential to significantly affect 
climate emissions from the built environment for years to come.Revise 
target date 
to 20217.4a Explore options to identify how 
best to engage and ensure 
representation across all sectors 
of East Lothian’s community, to 
involve our communities in the 
local planning of our Climate 
Emergency Response (e.g. 
Citizens’ Assembly; Climate 
Change Forum / Network)CCPMG; SECCO; 
external partnersOptions appraisal 
involving all sectors of 
East Lothian’s community
7.4b Produce a Communications Plan 
setting out our awareness-raising 
and engagement proposalsSECCO;  Corporate 
CommunicationsProduction of 
Communications PlanCommunications Plan 
produced and 
implemented2020 COVID has impacted on the production of a formal Communications 
Plan, and Climate Change messaging had to be handled sensitively in 
relation to prioritising COVID messaging during the pandemic. 
However, the Climate Change Officer continues to liaise almost 
weekly with the Corporate Communications team over appropriate 
publicity and promotion around Climate Change. Appropriate social 
media messaging was released each day of 'Climate Week' in 
September 2020, and Corporate Communications ensures that news 
releases relevant to the climate change agenda reference the Climate 
Change Strategy.