1
Technical Appendix | East Sussex Environment Strategy 2020East Sussex
Environment Board
East Sussex  
Environment Strategy 2020
Technical Appendix
‘At pace & at scale’East Sussex Environment Strategy 2020 | Technical Appendix2Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
Climate Change  .......................................................... 4
Natural Capital  .......................................................... 13
Air Quality  .............................................................. 19
Water  ................................................................... 25
Resource Efficiency  ...................................................... 32
Glossary  ................................................................ 37Contents
2East Sussex Environment Strategy 2020 | Technical Appendix3
Technical Appendix | East Sussex Environment Strategy 2020Introduction
This is the Technical Appendix to the East 
Sussex Environment Strategy 2020. This 
Appendix should be read in conjunction with 
the Environment Strategy, which can be found 
here: www.eastsussex.gov.uk/environment/
priorities/environmentstrategy
The Environment Strategy sets out the 
compelling case for action to improve the 
environment at pace and at scale and commits 
to deliver a set of new priority actions. The 
delivery of some of these actions will be 
impacted by the Covid-19 crisis.
This Technical Appendix provides the evidence 
base to support the Strategy by:
 yproviding an analysis of the challenges 
and opportunities under the five key 
environmental themes identified in the 
Environment Strategy, namely climate 
change, natural capital, air quality, water  
and resource efficiency.
 ysetting out the legislative and policy context 
for each theme.
 yhighlighting some examples of the extensive 
work that is already in progress nationally and 
locally to address the environmental priorities.
 yexplaining the reasons why the short-term 
actions set out in the Strategy have been 
chosen.
No single organisation, acting alone, can 
secure the changes that we need. Therefore, a 
partnership of private, public and educational 
sector organisations has come together to form 
the Environment Board for East Sussex and has 
developed the Environment Strategy.
The organisations represented on the 
Environment Board are:
 yThe Country Land and Business Association
 yEast Sussex County Council
 yNational Farmers Union
 yPlumpton College
 ySouth East Water yUniversity of Brighton
 yWealden District Council
 yEastbourne and Lewes Councils
 yEnvironment Agency
 yNatural England
 ySouthern Water
 ySussex Chamber of Commerce
 yUniversity of Sussex
The main aim of the Board is to drive 
measurable improvements in our environment, 
to ensure East Sussex continues to be a place 
where people want to live, work, study, visit 
and do business.  The Board will do this by 
leading the delivery of the actions set out in the 
Environment Strategy.
Progress in delivering the actions in the Strategy 
will be reviewed and reported on every year and, 
subject to progress, additional actions will be 
agreed every year. The effect of the actions will 
be tracked through a small number of targeted 
performance indicators, to provide reliable 
and objective information about whether the 
environment is improving over time or not and 
where more action may be needed to achieve 
the long term goals set out in the Strategy. The 
link between actions taken and environmental 
change is often not direct or immediate, and 
data may show year-to-year fluctuations that 
are difficult to assess. These factors will be 
addressed in the annual progress report and the 
indicator framework will be kept under review 
so that it continues to be relevant and provide 
a useful, transparent and cost-effective way of 
assessing progress.
There are a number of social, cultural, economic, 
demographic and political factors that impact 
on our environment, but an analysis of these are 
beyond the scope of this Appendix. For example, 
the long term aims set out in the Environment 
Strategy will only be achieved if people change 
their behaviour.
The following sections of the Technical Appendix 
provide the evidence base for the Environment 
Strategy, looking at each environmental theme 
in turn, starting with climate change.East Sussex Environment Strategy 2020 | Technical Appendix4The challenge
The 2018 UN Paris Agreement on climate 
change commits the global community to take 
action to limit the increase in global average 
temperature to 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels 
to avoid catastrophic and irreversible climate 
change. The UN’s Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change concluded that to achieve this 
requires “rapid, far-reaching, and unprecedented 
changes in all aspects of society”.
Human activity has already led to an average of 
1°C of global warming from pre-industrial levels, 
which is resulting in damaging impacts on lives, 
infrastructure and ecosystems that are apparent today. For instance, global sea-level has risen by 
about 20cm since the start of the 20th century 
and global average crop yields have decreased 
by about 5% since the 1960s. Business-as-usual 
would lead to global average temperatures about 
4-5°C above pre-industrial levels by 2100, with 
more warming expected beyond that (figure 1). 
Even the best-case scenario of 1.5°C of warming 
will see extreme temperatures in many regions 
and leave disadvantaged populations with food 
insecurity, lost incomes, and worse health. The 
most severe impact is predicted to occur in poor 
countries, which are responsible for a small 
fraction of total historic global emissions and 
have the least capacity to protect themselves.
Figure 1. The climate change impact of different increases in average global temperatures  
(Committee on Climate Change, 2019)
The predicted impacts of climate change in 
East Sussex include more frequent and intense 
flooding, drought and episodes of extreme heat, 
as well as impacts from the effects of climate 
change overseas, such as on food supply. This 
will lead to an increase in heat-related deaths, 
particularly amongst the elderly, damage to essential infrastructure, increased cost of 
food, disruption to supply chains and service 
provision, greater coastal erosion and impact on 
coastal habitats.
The UK, which is the 5th largest cumulative 
emitter of greenhouse gases since the industrial Climate change5
Technical Appendix | East Sussex Environment Strategy 2020revolution, has set a legally-binding target 
under the Climate Change Act to reach net 
zero emissions by 2050. The Committee on 
Climate Change, which acts as an independent 
advisor to government, has estimated that the 
cost of meeting this target will be about 1-2% 
of GDP , which would be partially offset by the benefits of avoiding the worst impacts of climate 
change, for example by having to build more 
flood defences. The cost of having to adapt to 
the effects of unabated climate change was 
estimated in the Stern Report to be about 5% of 
GDP (2006)’.
Figure 2. Change in UK GDP and greenhouse gas emissions between 1990-2018 (BEIS, 2019)
Reducing greenhouse gas emissions (GHGs) and 
increasing economic prosperity are not mutually 
exclusive. This is clear from the 40% reduction 
in UK carbon emissions since 1990, during 
which time the economy has grown by 2/3rds 
(figure 2). This has meant that UK per capita 
emissions are now close to the global average 
of 7-8 tonnes of CO2e per person. This significant 
reduction in emissions has largely been 
achieved by replacing most coal-fired power 
stations with natural gas and renewables, by 
the reduction in biodegradable waste going to 
landfill and by the off-shoring of some emissions 
to other countries.
CO2 emissions in East Sussex fell by 27% 
between 2005 and 2016, during which time the 
population grew by about 8%. This excludes 
emissions that occur outside the boundary of 
East Sussex as a result of the demand for goods 
and services that are consumed in East Sussex. 
This reduction is similar to the national rate of reduction, as it has been driven by the same 
changes, for instance the switch from coal to 
gas and renewables to generate electricity. 
Emissions in East Sussex from all sectors 
have decreased, but the reduction from local 
transport is significantly less (at -6%) than the 
domestic sector (-33%) and commercial and 
industrial sector (-40%). Consequently, transport 
now accounts for the largest share (44%) of total 
carbon emissions in East Sussex (figure 3, page 
6). This is similar to the national picture.
The Covid-19 crisis has led to the largest 
reduction in GHGs on record, as society 
has demonstrated profound resilience and 
adaptability in making radical changes to 
behaviour. The key challenge is whether recovery 
plans can both lock in the environmental 
improvements that have occured because of the 
Covid-19 crisis and deliver economic prosperity.East Sussex Environment Strategy 2020 | Technical Appendix6
Figure 3. CO2e emissions by sector between 2005-17 in East Sussex (Source: BEIS, 2019)  
The volume of GHGs in the atmosphere 
determines global average temperatures. 
Therefore, to stay below a global average 
temperature increase of 1.5°C above pre-
industrial levels means that there is only a fixed 
amount of additional GHGs that can be released 
to the atmosphere, and that all emissions above 
this budget will contribute to exceeding the 
1.5°C threshold. This remaining global ‘budget’ 
of greenhouse gases can be divided into 
national and sub-national budgets in different 
ways, each of which has their strengths and 
weaknesses.
The UK’s Tyndall Centre for Climate Change 
Research has developed a recognised 
methodology for calculating the remaining 
budget by local authority area. This provides a 
useful starting point to specify by how much 
and how quickly an area needs to reduce CO2 emissions to keep within its carbon budget. The 
Tyndall Centre estimates that the total emissions 
of GHGs from East Sussex in 2017 were about 
2.295 million tonnes and that the remaining 
GHG budget for the county is about 14 million 
tonnes. This means that, if we continue with 
business-as-usual, the county’s budget will 
be used up in less than 7 years, beyond which 
all local emissions will contribute to pushing 
global average temperatures above 1.50C. To 
stay within budget requires cutting emissions 
by an average of about 13% per year, which 
roughly equates to cutting total emissions in 
half every 5 years (figure 4). This rate of change 
has not been achieved in the past. However, 
this science-based approach to setting a GHG 
reduction target is increasingly being adopted. 
For instance, companies with a collective market 
valuation of over $13 trillion have signed up to 
the international Science Based Target Initiative.7
Technical Appendix | East Sussex Environment Strategy 2020
Figure 4. Cumulative CO2 emissions budget for East Sussex from 2018 to 2100  
(Source: Tyndall Centre for Climate Change, 2020)
Reaching net-zero emissions requires far 
reaching changes across all levels of society 
within a relatively short timeframe, set against a 
predicted increase in the demand for energy due 
to a growing population and economic growth. 
The key challenges to achieving net zero include:
1. Current performance : to keep average 
global warming to no more than 1.5°C 
above pre-industrial levels requires a global 
reduction in greenhouse gases of 45% by 
2030 against a 2010 baseline. However, 
since the first IPCC report was published in 
1990 global emissions have increased by 
60% rather than decreased. There are many 
UK and local examples of slow progress 
to date. For instance, less than 5% of UK 
industrial energy demand is currently met 
by low carbon sources, whilst walking rates 
in East Sussex have decreased in recent 
years and the current stock of housing and 
business workspace – most of which will still 
be in use in 2050 – is not energy efficient.2. Timescale : the speed of decarbonisation 
is constrained by the time required for the 
development of markets, supply chains 
and infrastructure, as well as innovation 
and turnover of the capital stock (e.g. a 
decarbonised electricity grid, vehicles, 
heating systems and industrial plant). 
However, major decisions about low carbon 
infrastructure that will be in place for a long 
time need to be made soon and implemented 
quickly to enable the net carbon zero target 
to be met.
3. Finance : there needs to be a significant 
focus of public and private investment into 
low carbon capital stock and technologies. 
For instance, it’s estimated that about £8 
billion would be required to retrofit existing 
domestic properties in East Sussex to  
achieve their maximum energy efficiency.  
The Committee on Climate Change concluded 
that this kind of investment will largely be 
off-set in the long term by reduced energy East Sussex Environment Strategy 2020 | Technical Appendix8costs and the delivery of co-benefits. For 
example, improving the energy efficiency of 
domestic properties reduces fuel poverty 
and associated health impacts from living 
in cold homes. The Committee noted that 
much of this investment could be a re-
directing of existing rather than additional 
investment, and that public funds might need 
to contribute about 10% of the total required.
4. Policy : the frequent changes to policy, 
such as the changes to the funding and 
subsidy arrangements for renewable energy 
systems and ultra-low emission vehicles, 
lead to significant fluctuations in delivery 
and uncertainty for investors. For instance, 
the number of insulation measures delivered 
in 2018 was the lowest since 2008, largely 
due to changes in how fuel poverty measures 
were funded, and there was an 18% 
reduction in the number of solar schemes 
installed in the first 3 months after the feed in 
tariff ended (Department for Business, Energy 
and Industrial Strategy, 2019).
5. Skills : there’s a widely-recognised shortage 
of people with the required skills in building 
design, construction and in the installation 
of energy efficiency and renewable energy 
systems to meet the scale of change required 
over the next decade (The Economist, 2019). 
For example, it’s estimated that an additional 
2,200 tradespeople such as electricians and 
gas engineers are needed in East Sussex 
alone just to deliver an energy efficiency 
retrofit programme at scale for existing 
domestic properties (Retrofit Works, 2020).
6. Public acceptability : many people state 
that they support the need to mitigate and 
adapt to climate change, but the evidence 
of actual change in personal investment 
and behaviours is limited, for instance with 
low uptake of domestic low carbon heating 
options such as heat pumps, despite the 
generous subsidy. To date, much of the 
success in reducing UK emissions has been 
invisible to the public, and there are not yet 
compelling narratives to inspire and mobilise 
mainstream participation in solutions, or 
the adoption of technologies and change in behaviours. In addition, most voters tend 
not to like to have to make hard choices or 
engage with complex issues.
7. Uncertainty : there are a number of key 
unknowns, including in key parts of the 
science of climate change, the rate at which 
technologies might become available and 
how effective they might be. For example, 
it’s unclear what role hydrogen might play in 
both transport and heating compared with, 
or alongside, a decarbonised electricity grid, 
with the risk of investing today in what could 
become stranded assets in future.
8. Collective action : tackling climate change 
requires action by every part of society. 
However, harm from climate change is 
driven much more by what others do than 
what individual countries, organisations or 
individuals do. Consequently, everyone has 
an incentive to free-ride on the sacrifices 
and costs incurred by others to cut their 
emissions, which undermines the case for 
collective action. This is further complicated 
by the need to ensure that those on low 
incomes are assisted with the financial cost of 
transition, for instance to low carbon heating 
at home or transport.
Even if global warming can be limited to 1.5ºC, 
significant additional investment will still need 
to be made in measures to adapt to the effects 
of climate change that are already locked in 
due to past emissions of greenhouse gases. 
The main effects include increased flooding 
as a result of sea level rise and the possible 
increase in the severity of storm events, 
droughts and heat waves. The UN Environment 
Programme estimates that by 2030, assuming 
global average temperatures do not exceed 2°C, 
poor countries will need to spend somewhere 
between $140 billion to $300 billion each 
year on adaptation measures, such as coastal 
defences. An increase above 2°C will require 
more spending on adaptation, and unmitigated 
global warming could result in catastrophic 
scenarios that outstrip the capacity to adapt 
(The Economist, 2019).9
Technical Appendix | East Sussex Environment Strategy 2020In the UK, mean sea level around the UK has 
risen by about 17 cm since the start of the 20th 
century, when corrected for land movement 
(Met Office, 2018). Continued rise in sea level 
is predicted to have an impact on property, 
infrastructure, supply chains and service 
delivery. For instance, in England around one in 
six properties and over half of water and sewage 
treatment works are already in areas at risk of 
flooding from rivers, the sea or surface water.
The greater the increase in climate change the 
greater will be the need – and the higher the 
cost – of adaptation. There will also be limits to 
the ability to adapt, for instance in being able to 
protect coastal infrastructure and communities. 
The responsibility for adapting to climate change 
is divided between a range of organisations 
and there is an extensive network of assets and 
systems in place to manage these risks. For 
example, the Sussex Resilience Forum prepares 
for the effects of extreme weather, including 
storms, flooding, heatwaves and droughts. But 
currently there is no strategic and integrated assessment of the likely impacts of climate 
change in East Sussex, supported by a single 
adaptation plan to ensure future resilience.
The opportunity
Any action to reduce emissions helps to limit 
the risk of triggering large-scale, irreversible and 
damaging shifts in the climate. This can deliver 
multiple benefits, including:
1. Greater prosperity
The low carbon and environmental goods and 
services sector contributed over £30 billion to 
the UK economy in 2015, employing more than 
430,000 people in largely high value jobs, and 
grew by 23% between 2010-15. In East Sussex 
the sector includes over 500 businesses, employing 
over 9,300 and generated £1.2 billion of sales in 
2017 . The scale of the challenge to get to net zero 
represents a very significant growth opportunity 
for this sector, whilst also delivering climate 
mitigation and cleaner air (figure 5).
Figure 5. Potential growth in the UK low carbon economy  
(Source: BEIS, 2019)East Sussex Environment Strategy 2020 | Technical Appendix10 yThe UK’s Clean Growth Strategy of 2017 
estimated that businesses could improve 
their energy efficiency, on average, by at least 
20% by 2030, which could deliver up to £6bn 
in cost savings for businesses, as well as cut 
up to 22Mt CO2e (BEIS, 2017).
 yThe need to decarbonise is driving 
considerable innovation, for instance in smart 
technology to help manage demand on the 
electricity grid and drive consumer behaviour, 
the benefits of which then spreads across the 
wider economy.
2. Improved health
 yAir quality: most measures that reduce 
greenhouse gases also reduce air pollution, 
for instance when replacing diesel or 
petrol vehicles with electric vehicles. These 
measures deliver immediate and long-term 
benefits to health.
 yWinter deaths: about a third of the estimated 
34,300 national excess winter deaths are 
attributable to living in a cold home, which 
would be reduced with more energy efficient 
homes.
 yDiet: meeting the average dietary intake 
recommended by the World Health 
Organisation, for instance by reducing the 
consumption of intensively-reared red meat, 
would reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 
up to 17% and reduce the incidence of type-2 
diabetes, stroke and certain types of cancer.
 yExercise: investing in walking and cycling 
delivers a cost-benefit ratio of between 2:1 
to 10:1 because the health benefits enable 
people to be more productive and reduce the 
cost burden on the health system.
3. Reduced poverty
 yOver 320,000 fuel-poor households in 
England live in properties with an F or G 
energy performance rating and, currently, 
about 10% of households in East Sussex 
are fuel poor. F and G rated properties cost 
an average of £1,000 more per year to heat 
compared with a typical home, and fuel 
poverty contributes to mental and physical 
ill-health. Consequently, increasing the energy efficiency of properties can help those 
living in fuel poverty to save money, lift more 
people out of poverty, and reduce carbon 
emissions.
4. Greater security
 yEnergy: reducing energy demand and 
increasing the amount of renewable energy 
generated in the UK improves the UK’s  
energy security by reducing our reliance on 
imported oil and gas, much of which comes 
from politically volatile regions.
 yMigration: the UN predicts that climate 
change and the associated rise in sea level 
will make a number of areas uninhabitable 
and force some populations to migrate. The 
Committee on Climate Change concluded 
that, as a consequence, it stands to reason 
that higher levels of climate change are likely 
to be associated with greater numbers of 
people forced to seek refuge in countries 
such as the UK.
Current action
There’s a complex mix of international and 
national regulation, policy, fiscal measures, 
voluntary agreements and market pressure that 
is driving investment in measures to mitigate 
and adapt to climate change. These include:
1. Reporting on carbon emissions:  there 
are various mandatory reporting schemes 
in place for larger companies. These include 
Climate Change Agreements with specific 
industries, and the new Streamlined 
Energy and Carbon Reporting scheme, 
which requires about 12,000 large or listed 
businesses to report annually on their energy 
use and carbon emissions, and to explain 
the measures they are taking to reduce their 
energy consumption.
2. Legislative and policy targets:  some of the 
main requirements are summarised in table 1 
(on page 12).
3. Fiscal measures to reduce emissions:  a 
mix of taxes on carbon emissions (eg. the 
EU Emissions Trading Scheme and the UK 
Climate Change Levy) and subsidies for 
investment in renewables and low carbon 11
Technical Appendix | East Sussex Environment Strategy 2020vehicles (eg. the Renewables Heat Incentive) 
are driving investment in climate mitigation 
measures.
4. Voluntary sector-based schemes 
to reduce emissions:  these include 
agreements between the government and 
different economic sectors to help deliver net 
zero emissions. For example, the UK Offshore 
Wind Sector Deal has been established to 
support the sector to aim to produce one 
third of the UK’s electricity from offshore wind 
by 2030.
5. Regional energy hubs:  the South East 
Energy Strategy, which was partly developed 
by the South East Local Enterprise 
Partnership, sets out some ambitious targets 
(see table 1). Delivery is supported by 
government-funded regional energy hubs, 
which provide technical support to develop 
energy projects across the South East.
6. Community sector activity:  Community 
Energy South, based in Lewes, brings 
together a number of local community 
organisations across the south to develop 
community-owned energy schemes, notably 
solar PV schemes.
New actions on climate change
The actions set out in the Environment Strategy 
on climate change are to develop:
1. A science-based road map for cutting  
carbon emissions from East Sussex.
2. A pipeline of projects that deliver a  
significant reduction in carbon emissions.
3. An electric vehicle charging strategy for  
East Sussex.
The reasons for the actions:
1. A science-based road map:  the purpose 
of the road map is to begin to set out how a 
13% per year reduction might be achieved.2. A pipeline of projects:  there is an urgent 
need to increase the pace and scale of 
mitigation measures, in order to contribute 
to the delivery of secure, affordable and 
sustainable energy. Therefore, based on the 
priority measures identified in the road map, 
a process will be established with a range of 
partners to identify and bring forward more 
and larger projects that can reduce carbon 
emissions.
3. An electric vehicle charging strategy:  
There’s no plausible path to net zero without 
major reductions in transport emissions. 
Currently, there is no strategic co-ordination 
of what types of charge points are points 
should be installed where and when in the 
country or in the county. The indications 
so far are that the market is only looking 
to provide charge points where there is a 
financial return, which is likely to leave some 
areas of the county, particularly in rural and 
deprived communities, with less access to 
charge points. This will limit future mobility, 
as the sale of petrol and diesel vehicles is 
gradually phased out by 2040, including for 
local businesses and for visitors. An electric 
vehicle charging strategy will be developed 
to identify how best to address this market 
failure and ensure a network is developed 
which is socially and economically just.
The indicator:  The effect of the above actions 
in reducing CO2 emissions from East Sussex will 
be measured by using the government’s annual 
report on ‘The local and regional carbon dioxide 
emissions estimates’ since 2005, as it provides 
an independent, recognised and publicly-
accessible dataset.
The lead organisations:  all the local 
authorities in East Sussex have declared 
a climate emergency, either covering their 
corporate emissions or their area emissions  
or both. Therefore, they will collectively lead  
on the actions above and will work with a range 
of partners, recognising that everyone has a part 
to play in addressing climate change.East Sussex Environment Strategy 2020 | Technical Appendix12Level What By
UNSustainable Development Goals (2015)
 yTarget 7.2  Increase the share of renewable energy.
 yTarget 7.3  Double the global rate of energy efficiency.
 yTarget 13.1  Strengthen resilience and adaptation to climate change.
 yTarget 13.3  Improve education on climate change.2030
2030
2030
2030
EUEU 2030 Climate & Energy Framework (2014)
 yIncrease renewable energy use to at least 32% of total energy.
 yIncrease energy efficiency by at least 32.5% from 1990 levels.
 yReduce greenhouse gas emissions by 80-95% from 1990 levels.
 yEU F-Gas Regulations: reduce F-gas emissions by two-thirds  
compared to 2014 levels.2030
2030
2050
2030
UKThe Energy Efficiency Regulations (2015)
 yAll new rented properties must have EPC rating of E or above.
 yAll existing properties must have EPC rating of E or above.2023
Fuel Poverty Strategy (2015)
 yAs many fuel poor homes as possible to reach an EPC band  
of E by 2020, band D by 2025 and band C by 2030.2025
Clean Growth Strategy (2018)
 yPhase out the use of unabated coal to produce electricity.2040
Road to Zero (2018)
 yAll new cars and vans to be effectively zero emission.2040
Clean Maritime Plan (2019)
 yAll vessels operating in UK waters to be zero emission.2050
Climate Change Act (2008, revised 2019)
 yNet zero emissions of GHGs.2050
South 
EastTri-LEP energy strategy (2019)
 yDecarbonize in line with the national trajectory.
 yReduce CO2 emissions by 13,615 kilo-tonnes.
Transport for the South East Transport Strategy (2020)
 yCut the South East’s carbon emissions to net-zero.2050
2050
2050
Table 1. Key climate change legislative and policy targets.East Sussex Environment Strategy 2020 | Technical Appendix
1213
Technical Appendix | East Sussex Environment Strategy 2020The challenge
Natural capital refers to the stock of natural 
assets such as soils, water, forests and the 
natural processes and cycles that underpin 
them, as well as the flows of benefits they 
provide to people including food, fuel, clean 
water, pollination of crops and climate 
regulation (figure 6). This multitude of services 
and benefits all have a value, some of which 
can be quantified, such as the value of timber 
or food produced from farmland, and others are 
either under-valued or unvalued and, therefore 
tend not to be taken into account in decision-making. Consequently, natural capital is often 
degraded or lost because it’s perceived to be 
free, as well as because there are often multiple 
beneficiaries, some of whom will behave as free 
riders. Yet natural capital regulates numerous 
life-supporting processes and provides the raw 
materials on which our economic prosperity is 
built. Therefore, it’s increasingly understood that 
protecting and enhancing natural capital is not 
an economic cost but is necessary to maintain 
the foundations of a productive and resilient 
economy and society.
Figure 6. Ecosystem services and benefits (World Wide Fund for Nature, 2020)
No model is ever likely to capture all the value 
of natural capital, for instance where intangible 
or non-market benefits are provided, such as 
cultural services. In addition, ‘nature’ has an 
intrinsic value irrespective of human measures 
of utility. Yet there is also a clear market failure 
to protect and develop public ‘goods’ that are 
provided through natural capital. For example, 
more than 2 billion people rely on wood fuel to 
meet their primary energy needs and about  4 billion people rely mainly on natural medicines 
for their health care.
In 2019 the Intergovernmental Platform on 
Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES), 
which is an independent intergovernmental 
body, evaluated changes in global natural 
capital over the last 50 years and the 
implications for our economies, livelihoods, food 
security and quality of life. The key challenges 
were identified as follows:Natural capitalEast Sussex Environment Strategy 2020 | Technical Appendix14 ythe diversity within species, between species 
and of ecosystems is declining faster than at  
any time in human history. Loss of diversity, 
including genetic diversity, poses a serious 
risk to global food security by undermining 
the resilience of many agricultural systems to 
threats such as pests, pathogens and climate 
change.
 yaround 1 million species already face 
extinction, many within decades, unless 
action is taken to reduce the intensity of 
drivers of biodiversity loss. Extinction rates 
increased sharply in the past century, with 
the global rate of extinction being at least 
tens to hundreds of times higher than it has 
averaged over the past 10 million years.
 ythe value of agricultural crop production has 
increased approximately threefold since 1970, 
but soil organic carbon and pollinator diversity 
have declined, which indicates that gains in 
production are unlikely to be sustainable in 
the long term. In the UK, soil degradation was calculated in 2010 to cost £1.2 billion every 
year (Environment Agency, 2019).
 yland degradation has reduced productivity 
in 23% of global terrestrial areas, whilst over 
85% of wetlands area, which provide coastal 
protection and are important fisheries, has 
been lost. In the UK, 90% of our wetland 
habitats have been lost.
The rate of global change in nature during 
the past 50 years is unprecedented in human 
history. The main causes are the intensification 
in the use of land and sea resources, pollution, 
non-native invasive species and climate change 
(figure 7). Underlying drivers include production 
and consumption patterns, population growth 
and technological changes. As these causes 
and drivers are largely projected to continue for 
the foreseeable future so the negative trends 
outlined above are predicted to worsen in most 
future scenarios. These are not only damaging 
to nature but also have a direct impact on our 
prosperity and wellbeing.
Figure 7. Key drivers of species decline (World Wide Fund for Nature, 2018)
In the UK, the Natural Capital Committee, which 
is an independent advisory body to government, 
concluded in 2019 that natural capital in the UK is deliveringflows of benefits well below what 
is possible or desirable. This is largely because 
data on species and habitats show significant 15
Technical Appendix | East Sussex Environment Strategy 2020losses over the last 50 years (figure 8). For 
example:
 yabout a third of UK soils are thought to be 
degraded and about a third of fish stocks are 
at unsustainable levels.
 y71% of European-designated sites in the UK 
are in unfavourable condition, compared with 
an EU average of 30%. yMore species have shown strong or moderate 
decreases in abundance (41%) than 
increases (26%) since 1970, and likewise 
more species have decreased in distribution 
(27%) than increased (21%) since 1970.
(Defra, 2018; State of Nature Partnership, 2019).
Figure 8. Farmland bird index (DEFRA, 2019)
The trends in East Sussex are broadly similar 
to those seen nationally, with over 400 
species found in the county which are either 
globally threatened or in rapid decline (Sussex 
Biodiversity Records Centre, 2019).
A key barrier to addressing these challenges is 
being able to monetise and measure a return 
from investing in natural capital to ensure a 
reliable income stream. For instance, a 2016 
survey by the Country Land and Business 
Association found that only 6% of its members 
felt that investing in the environment as part of 
their farming practices provided an attractive 
rate of return.The opportunities
Continuing with business as usual will continue 
to reduce the goods and services provided 
through natural capital. In contrast, investing 
in improvements to natural capital can deliver 
significant economic, social and environmental 
benefits, including:
1. Higher productivity:  the Office for National 
Statistics (ONS) estimated that the UK’s 
natural capital contributed about £760 billion 
to the economy in 2015. If properly measured 
and managed, natural capital could continue 
to provide this scale of benefits indefinitely.East Sussex Environment Strategy 2020 | Technical Appendix162. Contribution to growth:  East Sussex has 
significant natural capital, with environmental 
designations covering over 2/3rds of the 
county compared with an average of 25% 
across England (DEFRA, 2018). This unique 
natural environment underpins part of the 
visitor economy, which makes up nearly 1 in 
5 businesses and a quarter of all jobs, and is 
largely managed by land-based industries, 
which make up over 7% of all businesses 
in East Sussex. And these jobs can’t be 
shipped abroad. (Skills East Sussex, 2017). 
Development that damages natural capital 
undermines sustainable prosperity, and may 
increasingly fail to gain community support, 
whereas development that includes good 
quality natural capital, such as green spaces, 
tend to increase the value of commercial and 
private property (Natural England, 2017).
3. Improved health outcomes:  a number of 
studies have shown that spending time in 
nature can deliver measurable improvements 
in mental and physical health which, in turn, 
deliver lower health care costs and increased 
productivity. For example, regular exercise 
can reduce the risk of hip fractures by 68%, 
type 2 diabetes by 40%, heart disease by 
35%, and depression by 30% (Department  
of Health, 2019). But there’s a local deficit  
in access to green spaces in the coastal area 
of the county and the value of existing  
natural assets is not being realised, with 
surveys indicating that less than 20% of 
those aged 16 or above living in East Sussex 
use outdoor space for health or exercise at 
least once a week.
4. Ecological resilience:  increasing the 
quantity and quality of habitats, and ensuring 
they are well-connected, enables habitats 
and species to cope better with changes such 
as climate change, whilst remaining healthy 
and productive.
5. Climate change mitigation:  significant 
amounts of greenhouse gases are locked up 
in ecosystems such as peatlands, soils and 
forests. Where these are poorly managed 
they become net contributors to global 
warming, but where they are well managed they become part of the solution to climate 
change by actively remove greenhouse gases 
from the atmosphere. The ONS estimated 
that in 2017 vegetation in the UK removed an 
estimated 28 million tonnes ( CO2 equivalent) 
of carbon gases and the Committee on 
Climate Change has made it clear that the 
UK’s net zero target will not be met without 
changes to how we use land. The developing 
carbon off-setting market provides a financial 
diversification opportunity for farmers and 
land managers.
6. Climate change adaptation:  a number of 
habitats, such as saltmarsh, provide coastal 
protection by anchoring sediments and 
absorbing wave energy. These, in turn, can 
deliver lower costs by reducing the need for 
hard engineering solutions in some locations.
Current action
There is extensive legislation and a large number 
of programmes and projects in place to protect 
and enhance natural capital in the UK. Examples 
include:
1. Legislative and policy targets:  some of  
the main targets are summarised in table 2 
(page 18).
2. Measuring natural capital:  nationally, the 
ONS is implementing a programme to record 
the size and condition of our natural assets 
and the physical and monetary values of the 
benefits and services they provide, to create 
a natural capital account (ONS, 2018). This 
will help to make the case for increasing 
investment in natural capital.
3. Sussex Natural Capital Investment 
Strategy: the Sussex Local Nature 
Partnership was set up in 2014 to conserve 
existing natural capital and develop new 
natural capital in Sussex. It includes 
conservation organisations, environmental 
regulators, local authorities and businesses, 
and has produced a Natural Capital 
Investment Strategy for Sussex in 2020. The 
purpose of the Strategy is to help decision 
makers become aware of the value of 
investing in natural capital. It includes a 
strategic assessment of the quality, quantity 17
Technical Appendix | East Sussex Environment Strategy 2020and location of key natural capital assets and 
whether they are successfully providing the 
services and benefits expected or whether 
they are assets at risk. This has identified a 
strategic priority list of what natural capital to 
invest in and where, both to protect what is at 
risk and to develop new assets.
4. Land management programmes:  over 
70% of land in England is farmed, so 
agriculture clearly has a major influence 
on natural capital. There are a number of 
agri-environment schemes, such as the 
Environmental Stewardship programme, 
which aim to improve natural capital, for 
instance by encouraging land management 
practices that reduce soil erosion and water pollution. At its peak, the Countryside 
Stewardship scheme covered over 70% 
of agricultural land, and for every £1 of 
support put in there has been an estimated 
£3.60 benefit to natural capital (DEFRA, 
2019). These publicly funded schemes 
are complemented by commercial land 
management schemes, such as between 
water companies and farmers. For example, 
Wessex Water uses reverse auctions to pay 
farmers for land management practices that 
reduce nitrate run-off, which brings lower 
fertiliser costs to farmers and lower water 
treatment costs to Wessex Water (Green 
Alliance, 2017).  
 
Level What By
UNSustainable Development Goals
 yTarget 15.1  Ensure the conservation, restoration and sustainable use 
of terrestrial and inland freshwater ecosystems.
 yTarget 15.5  Take urgent and significant action to reduce the 
degradation of natural habitats and halt the loss of biodiversity.2030
2030
EUEU Biodiversity Strategy (2011)
1. Achieve a significant and measurable improvement in the status of all 
species and habitats covered by EU nature legislation.
2. Restore at least 15 % of degraded ecosystems.
3. Achieve Good Environmental Status for fisheries.
4. Control or eradicate priority invasive alien species.2020
2020
2020
2020
UK25 Year Environment Plan
 yPlant 1 million trees in England’s towns and cities.
 ySustainable management of soil.
 yRestore 75% of terrestrial and freshwater protected sites  
to favourable condition.
 yCreate/restore 500,000 hectares wildlife-rich habitat  
outside protected sites.
 yIncrease woodland to 12% in England.2022
2030
2043
2043
2060
Table 2. Key natural capital legislative and policy targets.East Sussex Environment Strategy 2020 | Technical Appendix185. Partnerships that deliver natural capital 
benefits:  the Local Wildlife Sites partnership 
in Sussex is providing advice to landowners 
on how to manage their sites to deliver 
greater natural capital, and river catchment 
partnerships across the UK deliver a number 
of practical projects to improve the water 
environment, which have wider natural 
capital benefits. For example, the Sussex Flow 
Initiative in the River Ouse catchment aims to 
reduce the flood risk for residents in Uckfield 
and Lewes by creating and restoring natural 
river features, and in the process has restored 
areas of priority habitat.
6. Social prescribing:  this involves helping 
patients to improve their physical and mental 
health by connecting them to non-clinical 
community services. Examples include 
green gyms, health walks and taking part 
in conservation activities. The East Sussex 
Social Prescribing Pathway Project is currently 
developing a partnership of voluntary and 
community sector providers, to build on 
existing projects such as the free ‘rural 
rambles’ that take place in the South Downs 
National Park.
7. Climate change mitigation:  the government 
has set up the £50m Woodland Carbon 
Guarantee scheme to help accelerate 
woodland planting rates to sequester CO2.  
It provides landowners with a guaranteed 
price for the carbon credits, to help provide 
an additional long-term income from  
planting and maintaining woodland which  
is verified independently under the Woodland 
Carbon Code.
New action on Natural Capital
The action on natural capital in the Environment 
Strategy is to develop a Natural Capital 
Implementation Plan. The purpose of the Plan  
is to:
 yembed natural capital in land-use planning.
 yprepare a natural capital investment plan for 
Sussex. ydevelop a pipeline of projects that can be 
matched to potential funders and investors.
These include infrastructure providers and 
insurance companies looking to reduce their 
costs and risks, bonds from the financial 
markets, land management schemes and 
net gain funds, corporate sustainability 
funds, local community funding, private 
endowments, as well as more traditional 
public funding routes such as grants and 
developer contributions.
The reasons for the action:
 yTo address the urgent need to reverse the 
decline in natural capital in East Sussex by 
ensuring existing habitat is in better condition 
and is better connected, and developing new 
high quality habitat.
 yTo develop a strategic and co-ordinated 
implementation plan so that additional 
resources are targeted where they will deliver 
the most effective outcomes.
 yTo develop verifiable metrics, including ways 
of monetising and measuring a reliable return 
on investment, to attract more investment.
The indicator:  the effect of the action will 
be determined by measuring the total area of 
restored or new habitat delivered by the Natural 
Capital Implementation Plan. This indicator 
supports the 25 Year Environment Plan ambition 
to create or restore 500,000 hectares of wildlife-
rich habitat outside protected sites and will 
complement a number of existing indicators that 
are already reported on separately by a range of 
organisations, for instance on the condition of 
designated sites.
The lead organisation:  the Sussex Local  
Nature Partnership, which is currently hosted 
by East Sussex County Council and chaired by 
Southern Water, will lead the development of  
the Implementation Plan as this will build on  
the LNP’s Natural Capital Investment Strategy 
(see: http:/ /sussexlnp.org.uk ).19
Technical Appendix | East Sussex Environment Strategy 2020The challenge
Up to 36,000 deaths per year in the UK are 
attributable to exposure to outdoor air pollution 
(Public Health England, 2017). This makes air 
pollution the top environmental risk to human 
health in the UK, and the fourth greatest threat 
to public health after cancer, heart disease and 
obesity (Clean Air Strategy, 2019). The economic 
cost of air pollution on health is estimated at up to £20 billion per year due to the healthcare 
costs, premature illness and days lost from 
work (Royal College of Physicians, 2017). In 
addition, air pollution damages economic assets 
and the natural environment, by contributing 
to acidification and eutrophication of soil and 
water courses, and by damaging crops, forests 
and buildings.
Figure 9. Trend of main air pollutants measured in the UK from 1970 – 2017 (Ricardo, 2017).
Being exposed to poor outdoor air quality is 
not a lifestyle choice, as is smoking or drinking. 
Those most affected are children, pregnant 
women, those with existing cardiovascular and/
or respiratory disease, the elderly and those 
who spend more time in polluted locations, 
for instance people who live and work near 
busy roads. Consequently, there’s a correlation 
between areas of poor air quality and regions of deprivation, as high density and cheaper 
housing is often located closest to busy road 
networks, which compounds existing health 
inequalities (Public Health England, 2015).
Different pollutants have different impacts on 
health and the environment. The three main 
pollutants of concern to health in East Sussex 
are particulate matter (PM), nitrogen dioxide 
(NO2), and ozone (O3). These are linked to lung Air qualityEast Sussex Environment Strategy 2020 | Technical Appendix20diseases (asthma, bronchitis and emphysema), 
heart conditions, cancer and potentially 
neurological conditions such as reduced IQ 
in children and the onset of dementia. The 
main man-made sources are the combustion 
of fuels by vehicles, industry and, increasingly, 
from domestic wood burners. The largest 
local contribution is from vehicles. Some air pollutants have no safe levels of exposure, for 
instance particulate matter, which contributes 
to an estimated 290 deaths per year in East 
Sussex. Consequently, any improvement in air 
quality generally brings public health benefits 
to everyone and in all locations where there is 
exposure, not just identified hotspots of poor  
air quality.
Figure 10. Passenger kms by transport mode in Great Britain between 1952-2017 (Department for Transport, 2018).
Air quality in the UK has improved significantly 
since the first Clean Air Act of 1956, mainly due 
to the reduction in coal-fired power stations 
and an increase in cleaner transport (figure 9, 
opposite). The main sources of air pollution in 
the UK are now:
 yroad transport, which is the biggest source 
of NO2, due to the consistent increase in 
vehicles numbers and distance travelled 
(figure 10).
 ydomestic solid fuel, such as wood and coal 
burnt in stoves and open fires, which is the 
largest source of PM2.5.
 yagriculture, which accounts for 88% of UK emissions of ammonia, from the storage and 
spreading of manures, slurries and fertilisers.
The Department for Transport forecasts that, 
with no change in government policy beyond 
what has already been announced, road traffic in 
England is forecast to grow by between 17% and 
51% by 2050, mostly due to population growth 
and lower vehicle running costs (DfT, 2018). 
There will be considerable variability in traffic 
growth, for instance with traffic in Eastbourne 
forecast to increase by between 36-60% by 
2027 as a result of new housing. This forecast 
growth in housing and traffic is likely to increase 
air pollution, even with the transition to electric 
heating and transport.21
Technical Appendix | East Sussex Environment Strategy 2020The Environment Act 1995 requires District and 
Borough Councils to review and assess outdoor 
air quality in their areas, where members of the 
public are regularly exposed to pollution. If the UK 
health-based air quality objectives are not being 
met then a local authority is required to declare 
an Air Quality Management Area and to develop a 
plan to show how it intends to improve air quality.
In East Sussex there are two areas currently in 
breach of the statutory health-based thresholds 
– which were meant to have been achieved 
a decade ago – namely central Lewes and 
the Newhaven ring road, both due to local 
emissions from traffic. In addition, Lullington 
Heath in Wealden has frequently seen some of 
the highest levels of ozone recorded in the UK.
The opportunities
Delivering further improvements in local air 
quality will deliver significant economic, social 
and environmental benefits, including:
improved health outcomes:  the rate of 
premature death will decrease, which will also 
lower healthcare costs. For instance, reducing 
PM exposure by 10ug/m3 would potentially 
extend lifespan in the UK by five times more 
than eliminating casualties on the roads (Public 
Health England, 2017).
Better quality of life:  actions that increase 
active travel (walking and cycling) deliver 
multiple benefits, including a range of physical 
and mental health benefits such as measurable 
reductions in heart disease, diabetes, dementia 
and depression.
Higher productivity:  cleaner air will reduce the 
number of working days lost due to illness, whilst 
measures to move people from private vehicles 
to active travel and public transport will reduce 
congestion, which was estimated to have cost the 
economy about £8 billion in 2018 (Inrix, 2019).
Enhanced natural capital:  reducing pollution 
contributes to a reduction in acidification and 
eutrophication, which can impact on habitats 
and species.
Lower carbon emissions: most measures that 
reduce air pollution, such as walking and cycling, 
also reduce emissions of greenhouse gases.Current action
International and national regulatory and 
economic instruments, supported by a range of 
policies and programmes, are seeking to prevent 
air pollution from occurring in the first place rather 
than tackling air pollution after health-based limits 
are exceeded. Measures include:
 yLegislative and policy targets:  some of the 
main targets are summarised in table 3.
 yThe power sector:  unabated coal is being 
phased out completely by 2040, whilst heat 
and transport is increasingly electric, with 
investment in clean hydrogen and energy 
storage.
 yTransport investment:  there is significant 
investment in public transport, electric 
vehicles, and cycling and walking. For 
example, investment in walking and cycling in 
East Sussex between 2014-20 was over £22m.
 yThe agriculture sector:  changes to farming 
techniques are being implemented to reduce 
ammonia emissions.
 yTechnology:  this ranges from investment in 
broadband, which enables more flexible and 
remote working, and therefore less travel, 
to setting increasingly stringent emissions 
standards for new vehicles. For example, 
the ‘eSussex’ project is investing £28.5m in 
broadband infrastructure in the county.
 yRoad pricing:  road user charging schemes 
are being implemented in cities with 
particularly poor air quality, notably the 
various schemes that cover parts of London.
 yBehaviour change programmes:  to 
encourage more walking and cycling and use 
of public transport. For example, work with 
27 schools across Sussex in 2019 led to an 
average increase of 7% of pupils choosing to 
cycle to and from school.
 yConsumer preferences:  an emerging trend 
prior to Covid-19, was a growing demand 
for buying or leasing mobility services, such 
as ride sharing and car sharing, rather than 
buying an expensive asset such as a vehicle 
that remains unused most of the time.East Sussex Environment Strategy 2020 | Technical Appendix22Level What By
UNSustainable Development Goals
 yTarget 11.2  Provide access to safe, affordable, accessible and 
sustainable transport systems for all.2030
EUThe Ambient Air Quality Directive (2008)
 yNational exposure reduction targets depending of initial concentration.2030
Clean Air Programme for Europe (2013)
 yReduce health impacts due to particulate matter and ozone by 52%, 
relative to 2005 levels.2030
National Emission Ceilings Directive (2016)
 y‘% reduction in SOx, NOx, NMVOCs, PM2.5 and NH3’.2030
Euro Standards
 yReduction in carbon emissions from cars by 37 .5% and vans by 31%.
 yIncrease low emission vehicles registered cars to 35% and vans to 30%.2030
UKClean Air Strategy (2019)
 yReduce the number of people exposed to levels of PM2.5 above 10 
μg/m3 by 50% 
 yReduce particulate matter emissions against 2005 baseline by 46%.
 yReduce emissions of ammonia against 2005 baseline by 16%.
 yReduce emissions of nitrogen oxides against 2005 baseline by 73%.
 yPhase out diesel-only trains.
National Cycling and Walking Investment Strategy (2017)
 yDouble cycling levels
 yIncrease walking activity to 300 stages per person per year2030
2030
2030
2030
2040
2025
2025
Table 3. Key air quality legislative and policy targetsEast Sussex Environment Strategy 2020 | Technical Appendix
2223
Technical Appendix | East Sussex Environment Strategy 2020New action on air quality
The action:  to develop a local cycling and 
walking infrastructure plan for East Sussex for 
2020-30. The plan will outline a programme 
of infrastructure improvements, supported 
by behaviour change programmes, which the 
County Council, as the Highway Authority, will 
work with other key local partners to seek 
investment for.
The reasons:
1. transport is the largest local contributor 
to poor air quality. Therefore, encouraging 
more people to switch from using vehicles 
to walking and cycling by providing the right 
infrastructure is the intervention that has the 
greatest direct impact on local air quality.
2. Walking and cycling are forms of ‘active 
travel’ that deliver a number of co-benefits 
including improved health and wellbeing, 
reduced congestion, lower carbon emissions, 
and they do so in a way that is economically 
just, in that walking is free and cycling is very 
low cost.
3. The current rates of walking and cycling in 
East Sussex are relatively low, with walking 
rates showing a slight decrease over time 
and cycling rates showing a slight increase 
over time (figures 11 and 12). It’s been 
estimated that for every £1 spent on cycling 
and walking provision the NHS would save £4 
in health-related costs because there would 
be a reduced risk of coronary heart disease, 
stroke, cancer, obesity and type 2 diabetes 
(The Kings Fund, 2013).4. Most local journeys to and from work 
are below 5km. This enables cycling and 
walking for many of these journeys to be an 
achievable option.
5. To support the growth of sustainable 
communities by seeking to ensure that 
the approximately 2,000 new homes 
and additional employment space that is 
proposed to be built every year in East Sussex 
are well provided for walking and cycling, 
particularly following the lessons learned 
from Covid-19.
The indicators:  The effect of the action will be 
measured by monitoring local air quality. District 
and Borough Councils have a statutory duty to 
report every year on how the air quality in their 
area compares with UK air quality standards.  
The main pollutants of concern in East Sussex 
are nitrogen dioxide ( NO2) and particulate 
matter (PM). We will produce an annual report 
which compares the level of these pollutants 
across East Sussex with the health-based 
thresholds recommended by the World Health 
Organisation. The data set that this will be taken 
from is publicly available at:
www.sussex-air.net
The lead organisation:  East Sussex County 
Council, as the Highway Authority, will lead 
on developing the Local Cycling and Walking 
Infrastructure Plan.East Sussex Environment Strategy 2020 | Technical Appendix24
Figure 11. Walking rates in East Sussex (East Sussex in Figures, 2020).
Figure 12. Cycling rates in East Sussex (East Sussex in Figures, 2020).25
Technical Appendix | East Sussex Environment Strategy 2020The challenge
Water is essential to life: for drinking, sanitation, 
economic prosperity, the natural environment 
and recreation. We assume that it’s an infinitely renewable resource, yet freshwater makes up 
only 2.5% of all Earth’s water and much of this is 
either polluted or abstracted more quickly than 
it is being replenished (figure 13).
Figure 13. Global water (US Geological Society, 2017)
The UN’s latest report on global water resources 
(2019) highlights that:
 ya quarter of humanity already lives where 
water is severely scarce.
 ynearly 2 billion people drink water that’s not 
protected against contamination from faeces, 
with 340,000 children under five dying every 
year from preventable diarrhoeal diseases.
 y90% of all natural disasters are water-related. ywater is a growing cause of conflict within 
and between states.
The pressure on water quality and availability 
will increase due to population growth, higher 
standards of living and climate change, whilst 
the COVID-19 pandemic highlights that a lack 
of access to clean water for significant numbers 
of people for regular handwashing presents a 
public health risk to everyone.WaterEast Sussex Environment Strategy 2020 | Technical Appendix26In the UK, regulation has helped to drive a 
significant improvement in water quality over 30 
years. For example, the latest figures from Ofwat 
and the Environment Agency showing over 99% 
compliance with the UK and European standards 
for drinking water quality in England and 98% 
compliance with bathing water standards.
There has also been a significant reduction in 
serious water pollution incidents, from over  
500 per year from the water industry in the  
early 1990s to 57 in 2016. However, key 
challenges remain:
 yWater availability:  demand for water in the 
UK is mainly from households, the power 
sector and agriculture (figure 16). East Sussex 
is considered already by government as an 
area of serious water stress, as demand sometimes exceeds supply. Population & 
housing growth is forecast to drive greater 
demand for water, whilst climate change is 
likely to lead to an increase in the frequency 
and duration of droughts, due to an increase 
in summer temperatures and a decrease 
in rainfall. Therefore, the times of greatest 
demand from households and agriculture, 
during the summer, will coincide with the 
main periods of drought. The National 
Infrastructure Commission concluded that 
without further action to reduce demand, 
there is a 1 in 4 chance over the next 30 years 
that large numbers of households in England 
will have their water supply cut off for an 
extended period because of severe drought.
Figure 14. Water demand from different sectors
 yOver-abstraction:  the Environment Agency 
considers that abstraction in about a third 
of groundwater bodies and about one in 
ten surface waters in England is already 
unsustainable. Low water levels have a 
number of impacts on freshwater ecosystems: 
sediment builds up, pollutants become more 
concentrated, water temperature increases, 
and reduced water volume increases competition between species. An estimated 
80% of Sussex wetland and river ecosystems, 
some of which are rare, have been damaged 
or destroyed from over-abstraction and 
pollution. As a result, many wetland species 
have declined significantly. For example, 
Sussex water voles have declined by over 
98% in 30 years.27
Technical Appendix | East Sussex Environment Strategy 2020 yLeakage : about a third of water taken from 
the natural environment for distribution  
is wasted, through a combination of pipe 
leaks, losses during the treatment process 
and losses in the home (Environment  
Agency, 2018).
 yWater quality:  water pollution is mostly 
caused by land management practices (eg. 
agricultural run-off), wastewater treatment 
plants, and urban and highway run-off. In 
East Sussex, the quality of waterbodies has 
deteriorated in recent years (figures 14 and 
15). For instance, the quality of some ground 
waters, which provide about 70% of drinking 
water, have deteriorated due to rising nitrate 
levels, mostly due to historic farming practices.
 yClimate change:  water is probably the 
primary medium through which the effects  
of climate change can be felt most, due to 
sea level rise, the effect on water availability 
and flooding.
The opportunity
The objectives are to ensure that drinking water 
quality is maintained, water is distributed and 
used efficiently, that it’s available to all at a 
reasonable cost, and that there’s sufficient 
water of good quality to sustain the wider 
environment. The benefits of doing so include:
1. Lower costs to consumers:  if more water 
is available to reach consumers because 
of a lower leakage rate, and if consumers 
use water more efficiently, there’s less need 
to have to invest in building new water 
supply and wastewater infrastructure. In 
addition, if the quality of the water in the 
wider environment remains good then water 
companies need to spend less on water 
treatment.
2. More resilient and productive natural 
capital:  safeguarding the quality and 
quantity of water in the wider environment 
will ensure that the natural environment has 
greater resilience to adapt to pressures such 
as climate change, and continue to support 
productive fisheries, natural water purification 
processes and recreational opportunities.3. Climate change mitigation:  the water 
industry contributes about 1% of total UK 
greenhouse gas emissions, due to the power 
required to treat and distribute drinking water 
and treat wastewater. In addition, about 5% 
of total greenhouse gas emissions are due 
to the domestic use of hot water for cooking 
and cleaning (Waterwise, 2017). Lower water 
usage will reduce these emissions.
Current action
There’s a detailed regulatory regime covering 
water, with a number of key targets which 
are summarised in table 4 overleaf. The main 
organisations responsible for managing  
water are:
1. the Environment Agency, whose 
responsibilities include regulating water 
pollution, some aspects of flood risk and 
compliance with the EU Water Framework 
Directive, which requires that all water bodies 
are restored as close to their natural state as 
possible by 2027 , where practicable.
2. The water companies, which are required to:
 yproduce long term water resource 
management plans to show how they will 
balance supply and demand;
 ymeet drinking water standards overseen by 
the Drinking Water Inspectorate;
 ydeliver a number of environmental objectives 
set out in the Water Industry National 
Environment Programme, covering water 
quality, biodiversity and resilience.
3. Farmers and land managers, for instance 
through investment in Catchment Sensitive 
Farming.
4. Water companies and regulators such as the 
Environment Agency work together on water 
resource management on a regional scale. 
For example, ‘Water Resources South East’ 
is an alliance of the 6 water companies that 
cover the South East ,which seeks to develop 
a regional resilience plan for all water users.
27East Sussex Environment Strategy 2020 | Technical Appendix28
Figure 15. the overall status of surface waterbodies in East Sussex (source: EA, 2019)
Figure 16. (Source: Environment Agency, need an updated version)29
Technical Appendix | East Sussex Environment Strategy 2020Level What By
UNSustainable Development Goals
 yTarget 6.3  Improve water quality by reducing pollution and halving 
the proportion of untreated wastewater.
 yTarget 6.4  Substantially increase water-use efficiency.2030
EUWater Framework Directive
 yAll inland and coastal waters to reach at least ‘good’ status.2027
UK25 Year Environment Plan
 yIncrease the proportion of water bodies with enough water to support 
environmental standards from 82% to 90% for surface water bodies 
and from 72% to 77% for groundwater bodies.
OFWAT
 yWater companies to reduce leakage by an average of 15% from 2017-18.
Water Industry National Environment Programme
 yProtect and improve at least 6,000km of our waters.
 yProtect and improve 24 Bathing Waters and 10 Shellfish sites.
 yProtect and improve 1,800 hectares of protected nature  
conservation sites.
 yEnhance 900 km of river.
PR19 targets
 yZero serious pollution incidents.
 yTwo-thirds more catchment management schemes.
 y8,000km river improved.
 y98% of bathing waters meeting European standards by 2025.
National Framework for Water Resources (2020):
 yReduce water demand to an average of 110 litres per person per day.
 yHalve leakage rates.2021
2025
2025
2025
2025
Table 4. Key water legislation and policy targets.
29Technical Appendix | East Sussex Environment Strategy 2020East Sussex Environment Strategy 2020 | Technical Appendix30Current programmes and actions include:
1. Measuring water quality:  the Water 
Framework Directive has required a much 
better understanding of the current condition 
of water bodies and the potential measures 
to improve their status. This has helped to 
ensure evidence-based decisions about 
where to target cost-effective interventions.
2. Sustainable abstraction:  the Environment 
Agency has revoked or amended a number 
of abstraction licences, and applied licences 
to previously exempt abstractions, to retain 
water in the environment. This has meant 
that the volume of water currently abstracted 
for public supply is about the same level 
as during the 1970s, despite an increase in 
population of about 4 million people and 
the UK having the highest per capita level of 
water consumption in Europe.
3. Leakage reduction:  water companies 
have reduced rates by around a third since 
the mid-1990s. Ofwat’s challenge to water 
companies is to reduce leakage by a further 
15% by 2025 and the water industry has 
committed to halving leakage by 2050.
4. Demand reduction:  the land use planning 
system is gradually driving greater water 
efficiency in new developments, and the 
water companies are delivering initiatives to 
reduce demand, such as metering, awareness 
programmes, and the distribution of water-
saving devices.
5. Catchment management:  in East Sussex,  
the Adur and Ouse Catchment Partnership 
(www.adurandousecatchment.org.uk ) and 
the Cuckmere and Pevensey Levels Catchment 
Partnership ( www.cplcp.org.uk ) deliver 
a number of practical projects to improve 
the water environment. For example, agri-
environment schemes with land managers 
aim to reduce soil and pesticide run-off, 
which reduces costs for both farmers and 
water companies by retaining soil quality and 
reducing water treatment costs.
6. Measurable improvements in water 
quality:  the Water Industry National 
Environment Programme includes schemes such as the Hastings Bathing Water project, 
which tackled urban diffuse pollution by 
addressing misconnections and enabled 
Hastings bathing water quality to reach and 
remain at ‘good’ since 2015.
New action on water
The action:  to deliver advice and home visits 
business audits to assist households and 
businesses to reduce water usage.
The reasons for the action:
 yEast Sussex is already recognised by 
government as being a water-stressed area.
 yThe resilience of the water supply system can 
be increased by a combination of building 
new water infrastructure, reducing leakage 
and managing demand (figure 17). Water 
companies have comprehensive plans for 
new infrastructure and leakage, but would 
benefit from support to scale up programmes 
to manage demand, as this is a responsibility 
of all water users.
 yWater scarcity could impact on a number of 
important local economic sectors, including 
tourism and land management, as well as 
reduce the amount of water available in the 
natural environment, which would impact on 
a number of habitats and species.
 yImproved domestic water efficiency will 
reduce the pressure to increase water bills by 
reducing water consumption and reduce the 
need for additional investment in high cost 
water infrastructure such as reservoirs.
The indicator:  the effect of the action will be 
measured by a reduction in water demand (per 
capita consumption). The two water companies 
that supply water in East Sussex, Southern Water 
and South East Water, have monitoring plans in 
place and regular reporting requirements on per 
capita consumption.
The lead organisations:  Southern Water 
and South East Water, as they have the main 
statutory responsibility responsibility for 
ensuring the efficient use of water in East 
Sussex.31
Technical Appendix | East Sussex Environment Strategy 2020
Figure 17. Actions required to assure long-term water supply (National Infrastructure Commission, 2018)East Sussex Environment Strategy 2020 | Technical Appendix32The challenge
Global use of material resources has increased 
ten-fold since 1900 and is set to double again 
by 2030 (figure 18). In contrast, the UK’s raw 
material footprint fell by about 27% between 
2000 and 2013 while over the same period 
GDP rose by 18% and the population increased 
by about 6%. This de-coupling of GDP growth 
from resource use is likely to have been the result of a range of factors, including an 
increase in the service sector compared with 
manufacturing, changes in consumer patterns 
and improvements in resource efficiency. 
However, this de-coupling trend has stalled in 
the last few years, whilst the average life span 
of many products we buy and use in daily life is 
now lower than it was 20 years ago (Resources 
and Waste Strategy, 2018).
Figure 18. Global use of construction materials, ores & industrial minerals, fossil fuel energy and biomass  
(European Environment Agency, 2019)
The key challenges with our use of resources 
include:
 yAn inefficient model:  our mainly linear 
‘take-make-dispose’ economic model and 
culture fails to maximise the value of all 
materials, which reduces productivity (figure 
19). For example, in the UK an estimated 10 million tonnes of food and drink are wasted 
post-farm gate annually, worth around £20 
billion and equating to over 1 billion meals, 
most of which could be used.
 yThe scale of resource use:  the consumption 
of natural resources, such as sand and 
gravel, by developed countries is in the Resource efficiency33
Technical Appendix | East Sussex Environment Strategy 2020range of 54-85 tonnes per person per year 
(World Resources Institute, 2018). If the total 
global population consumed resources at 
this same rate then, on the basis of known global reserves of materials, we would need 
1.7 Earths to provide the resources we use 
and absorb the waste we generate (Global 
Footprinting Network, 2019).
Figure 19. The flow of material resources around the UK economy in 2014  
(Resources and Waste Strategy, 2018)
 yUnsustainable levels of resource use:  
some renewable resources are already 
harvested beyond the planet’s reproductive 
capacity, whilst non-renewable resources 
are, by definition, finite. For example, over 
a third of global fish stocks are being fished 
at a biologically unsustainable rate, which 
impacts on food security and the long-term 
prosperity of some coastal communities.
 yIncreasing and volatile costs:  there’s a clear 
long-term pattern of rising real commodity 
prices as demand has continued to grow but 
supply has been constrained. Higher and 
volatile prices have a negative impact on 
productivity (The Economist, 2018).   yPollution:  the rate at which resources are 
used and the inefficient way in which many 
are developed, used and managed drives 
significant levels of pollution, such as mine 
tailings and some plastic packaging.
There are no data on the flow of materials 
through the East Sussex economy. What we do 
know is that approximately 1.75 million tonnes 
of solid waste is generated each year in East 
Sussex and Brighton and Hove (figure 20), most 
of which is recycled, composted or incinerated 
with energy recovery. For households, this 
equates to an average of about 1 tonne per year. 
Over the last few years re-use and recycling rates 
have remained fairly static, in line with national 
rates, which means that we are still some way off  
reaching statutory recycling targets.East Sussex Environment Strategy 2020 | Technical Appendix34
Figure 20. Where solid waste in East Sussex comes from (ESCC, 2018)
The opportunities
A key means to address the challenges above 
is to develop a more circular economy model. 
This involves capitalizing on the full value of 
resources by keeping them in use for as long as 
possible, extracting the maximum value from 
them whilst in use, then recycling or disposing 
of them in a useful way (WRAP , 2019). The 
opportunities from doing so include:
 yGreater productivity:  because suppliers 
of goods and materials have an incentive to 
maintain the quality and value of their stock 
for as long as possible, and the model drives 
innovation by viewing waste as a design flaw.
 yJob creation:  these are generated, for 
instance, in the reuse and repair sector, which 
tends to create jobs and work experience 
opportunities for those who find it difficult to 
access employment.
 yLower costs to consumers:  by providing 
more durable or re-usable products, which 
tend to be less expensive to manufacture 
than products that are manufactured from 
virgin materials. yLess pollution:  a circular economy model 
requires less input of energy and virgin materials, 
which means that products have a smaller 
carbon footprint and generate less waste.
Current action
Existing regulatory and economic instruments 
that incentivise a circular economy, including:
1. Legislative and policy targets:  some of the 
main targets are summarised in table 5.
2. Extended Producer Responsibility 
schemes:  these require a producer to take 
responsibility for a product once a consumer 
has finished using it. These schemes cover a 
range of materials including packaging waste, 
vehicles, batteries and electronic and electrical 
equipment, with additional materials likely to 
be added. This incentivises producers to design 
their products to make it easier for them to 
be reused, dismantled and/or recycled at the 
end of their useful life and has stimulated the 
development of secondary markets.
3. Economic instruments:  this includes the 5p 
plastic bag charge at main retailers, which 35Level What By
UNSustainable Development Goals
 yTarget 12.3  Halve per capita global food waste.2030
EUWater Framework Directive (2008)
 yIncrease re-use and recycling of municipal waste to 55%.
 yIncrease re-use and recycling of municipal waste to 60%.
 yIncrease re-use and recycling of municipal waste to 65%.2025
2030
2035
UK25 Year Environment Plan (2018) &  
Resource & Waste Strategy (2018)
 yCut the greenhouse gas intensity of food and drink by a fifth.
 yNo food waste entering landfill.
 yEliminate avoidable plastic waste
 yDouble resource productivity.
 yZero avoidable waste2025
2030
2042
2050
2050
East 
SussexEast Sussex Joint Waste Management Strategy (2014)
 yLimit household waste produced to 995 kg per household per year.
 yRecycle and compost 50% of household waste.
 yReuse 15% of household waste.
 yDivert at least 95% of household waste from landfill.
 yRecycle and compost 60% of the household waste produced.2020
2020
2020
2020
2025
Table 5. Key resource efficiency legislation and policy targets.Technical Appendix | East Sussex Environment Strategy 2020
has led to approximately 15 billion fewer 
bags being handed out to shoppers in the UK 
between 2014 and 2018.
4. Voluntary schemes:  between government 
and those business sectors with a high 
material use and environmental impact. 
For instance, the Construction Sector Deal 
provides huge potential for increasing 
resource efficiency, through off-site 
manufacturing and innovative construction 
materials and techniques. The outcome from 
existing schemes is that between 2000 and 
2010 about 70 million tonnes of materials 
were put back into the economy.5. Successful circular economy business 
models:  these include buying mobility 
services such as car sharing clubs, leasing 
white goods, and on-line re-use platforms 
such as Gumtree and Freecycle.
It’s estimated that the economy-wide adoption 
of resource efficient business models in the UK, 
such as remanufacturing, repair, leasing and 
recycling, could benefit UK businesses by up to 
£23 billion per year (WRAP , 2019). The no- and 
low-cost interventions alone, with a payback of 
less than one year, are estimated to be worth 
about £3 billion per year.East Sussex Environment Strategy 2020 | Technical Appendix36Action on resource efficiency
The action:  to develop a food re-use network 
in East Sussex, to collect surplus food for 
redistribution.
The reasons for the action:
Food waste in the UK warrants special attention 
because:
 yMore than 10 million tonnes of food, worth 
over £20 billion, is wasted every year in the 
UK, 70% of which is edible and, therefore, 
could have been avoided (figure 21).
 yconsumers are spending £12 billion on 
food that goes in the bin, which equates 
to about £680 for the average family per 
year, at a time when Oxfam estimates that 
approximately two million people in the UK 
are malnourished.
 yAn estimated additional 4 million tonnes 
of food will be required by 2025 to meet 
projected increases in the UK population. yFood waste generated over 25 million tonnes 
of greenhouse gas emissions, which is 
equivalent to one in four cars on UK roads, 
and has a water footprint that is nearly twice 
the average domestic use of water.
 yThere’s an estimated benefit to cost ratio of 
14:1 for businesses to reduce commercial 
food waste.
 yThere is currently no county-wide programme 
to divert surplus commercial food from 
businesses to more productive use, including 
to those in need.
(WRAP, 2018).
The indicator:  the effect of the action will 
be measured by the amount of waste that is 
collected and re-distributed by a food re-use 
network.
The lead organisation:  the East Sussex 
Environment Board will lead the delivery of  
this action.
HOUSEHOLDS
7.1m tonnes
(£15bn)MANUFACTURING
1.85m tonnes
(£1.4bn)HOSPITALITY & FOOD SERVICES
1.0m tonnes
(£2.9bn)RETAIL
0.25m tonnes
(£0.8bn)TOTAL
FOOD WASTE:
10.2m TONNESEQUIVALENT
TO 156KG
PER PERSON
BY SECTOR THIS BREAKS DOWN AS:
Total food waste in the UK in 2015
(Source: UK Resources and Waste Strategy, 2019)
Figure 21. Food waste in England (Defra, 2019).Glossary
BEIS  Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy
CO2 Carbon dioxide
DfT Department for transport
EU European Union
GDP  Gross domestic product
GHG  Greenhouse gases
IPBES  Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services
LNP Local nature partnership
mtCO2 Million tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent
NMVOCs  Non-methane volatile organic compounds
NO2 Nitrogen dioxide
NOx Nitrogen oxides
O3 Ozone
ONS  Office for National Statistics
PM Particulate Matter
PM2.5 Particulate Matter (PM) that has a diameter of less than 2.5 micrometers
PV Photovoltaic solar electricity
SOx Sulphur oxides
UN United Nations
WRAP  The Waste and Resources Action Programme
37Technical Appendix | East Sussex Environment Strategy 2020Climate change
Join or support your local community energy group.
Go to www.communityenergysouth.org/engage
Resource efficiency
Buy a garden compost bin or wormery for your food waste.
Go to: www.getcomposting.com/profile/loginNatural Capital
Volunteer for an organisation such as the Sussex Wildlife Trust.  
Go to: sussexwildlifetrust.org.uk/get-involved/volunteer
Air quality
Get support with journey planning for walking, cycling or using public transport. 
Go to: www.eastsussex.gov.uk/roadsandtransport/localtransportplan/funding/
active-access-for-growth/active-access-for-growth
Water
Get free advice and water-saving visits from your water company.  
Go to: www.southernwater.co.uk/help-advice/how-to-save-water or  
www.southeastwater.co.uk/my-water-supply/save-water-save-moneyWhat can you do?
Feedback on the Environment Stategy
If you have any questions or comments on the Environment Strategy please 
email: eastsussexenvironmentstrategy@eastsussex.gov.uk
June 2020  19-20 140“The future of life on earth depends 
on our ability to take action.”
Sir David Attenborough
Broadcaster and Natural Historian
What can your organisation do?
Energy : contact LoCASE for free audits and grants at locase.co.uk/register-here
Air quality : contact the Energy Savings Trust for free advice and support at: 
energysavingtrust.org.uk/transport
Water : contact your water supplier for advice and support on water efficiency.
Resource efficiency : contact WRAP for sector-specific support at:  
www.wrap.org.uk/category/what-we-offer/business-support
Illustrations from www.flaticon.comEast Sussex Environment Strategy 2020 | Technical Appendix