 
Epping Forest District Council  | Climate Change Action Plan  2021  
Epping Forest District Council 
Climate Change Action Plan 2021  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 Draft for Consultation -  Version 7, August  2021   
  1 
 Contents  
Introduction  ............................................................................................................................................ 2 
Climate Change Context  ..................................................................................................................... 2 
Climate Change Action Plan Purpose  .................................................................................................. 3 
Policy Con text ..................................................................................................................................... 4 
Epping Forest District Council’s Own Emissions  ................................................................................. 5 
District Wide Emissions  ....................................................................................................................... 8 
Priority Actions for 2021/22  ................................................................................................................... 9 
Counci l Operations  ................................................................................................................................ 11 
Actions  .............................................................................................................................................. 12 
District Wide Actions ............................................................................................................................. 15 
Behaviour Change and Engagement  .................................................................................................  15 
District Travel  .................................................................................................................................... 16 
Air Quality  ......................................................................................................................................... 21 
District Wide Buildings  ...................................................................................................................... 23 
Natural Environment  ........................................................................................................................ 26 
Waste  ................................................................................................................................................ 29 
Climate Change Adaption  ................................................................................................................. 31 
Appendix 1  - Glossary  ........................................................................................................................... 33 
Appendix 2 –  Local Plan Policies Summary  ........................................................................................... 36 
 
 
 
  2 
 Introduction  
Climate Change Context  
Climate change is a global issue  primarily as a result of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from human 
activity and land use change . Communities, businesses and the natural environment are already 
feeling the impacts of the changing climate  with higher average temperatures and more extreme 
weather events such as droughts, flooding, heat waves and storms . Continued change is now 
unavoid able and will disrupt everyday life , particularly for the more  vulnerable  where climate 
change will deepen existing inequalities.   
More locally, flooding, water stress and overheating are the key changes projected for the East of 
England. Increased urbanization as well as changes in weather patterns can result in a reduced 
capacity for regions to absorb water, leading to more water surface runoff and increased flooding. 
Climate change projections suggest that in the period to 2050 and beyond, the UK will ex perience 
wetter winters and drier summers  with ov erall summer rainfall likely to decrease by up to 15%  
leading to pressure on our water supplies . There is only limited awareness  of the effect that climate 
change is having on causing overheating in our home s.  With average temperatures set to increase, 
and more hot spells anticipated, overheating could become more commonplace in the future   especially in urban areas. This can result in greater discomfort  for people and can exacerbate 
underlying health issue s. 
In August 2021, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) published the  Climate 
Change 2021 Report: The Physical Science Basis. The report gives evidence to show the ‘widespread 
and rapid’ changes to our climate that have occurred as a result of human influence. It then gives 
further evidence on the wide -ranging and severe im pacts of global warming w here  temperatures 
reach 1.5
oC above pre -industrial levels.  In 2015 , the UK committed to keeping global temperature 
increase well below 2oC by signing the Paris Agreement of the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change.  The UK also set a statutory target in the Climate Change Act 2008 to 
reduce UK GHG  emissions by 80% from 1990 levels by 2050. In June 2019, this was revised to reduce 
all GHG emissions to net zero by 2050.  
After considering the overwhelming evidence on cl imate change Epping Forest District Council 
(EFDC) declared a Climate Emergency in September 2019  and pledged to do everything within its 
power to make the area carbon neutral by 2030. This target is more ambitious than  the UK target to 
take bold action an d reduce emissions at a faster rate. Reaching this target will be a considerable 
task involv ing collaboration and engagement from  staff, residents, businesses, suppliers, partners 
and support from the UK Government to reduce emissions throughout the Distri ct. 
By stepping up acti on now there is  a better chance of avoiding the catastrophic impacts that a global 
temperature increase of greater than 1.5oC would have. Many of the climate actions that we can 
take are known to  deliver valuable social and economic benefits in terms of creating new jobs,  
saving  money , improving air quality, widening market opportunities and providing health benefits 
that can help to make Epping Forest District a great place where people enjoy living, wor king, 
learning and leisure.    
  
 
 3 
 Climate Change Action Plan Purpose  
The Climate Change Action Plan supports  the Council ’s ambition to do everything within its  power to 
become carbon neutral by 2030 . The Action P lan identifies  the main sources of carbon em issions, 
both within the Council ’s own operations and across the District , and outlines actions to reduce 
them .  
Achieving reductions in e missions across  the wider District will require close collaboration and action 
from residents, community groups, busin esses and other organisations . Therefore,  this Plan sets out 
how the Council plans to engage with these groups to support, influence and facilitate change.  
The Plan will be regularly updated to account for further developments in national legislation, 
regulation and policy. The Council is also undertaking further work to assess its indirect emissions;  
therefore, the plan will be updated when additional  emission reduction pathways are identifie d.  
The following main themes summarise  the key emissions reduction pathways identified:   
 
The section on Council Operations  sets out how the Council aims to reduce its own carbon emissions 
to become carbon neutral  and identifies  actions  on how this is to be achieved.  Council operations 
include emissions reduction in Council buildings , including the Civic offices , museum  and sheltered 
housing as well as emissions from the good s and services  that the Council purchases , business travel , 
staff commuting,  waste and leased assets . 
Further  sections of the Plan outline action that can be taken to  reduc e carbon emissions by 
residents, businesses and others  across the District , either through direct initiatives, using statutory 
powers or by inf luencing behaviour  change . This ranges from  emissions arising from travel , as well as 
from homes, business  premises and production  processes, through to the management and disposal 
of waste. Improve ment of  the natural greenspace in the area can help  to capture carbon, increase 
biodiversity and relieve pressure on the Epping Forest Special Area of Conservation (SAC) , which  is 
an important natural feature of the District.  Actions to address a ir quality and climate change are 
closely linked , so many of the mea sures proposed in this Plan will also support  improve ments in  air 
quality in the District and have beneficial effects on both human health and the Epping Forest SAC .  
Monitoring and reporting  
Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) are  listed within the document, these will be  reviewed and 
published on an annual basis.   •Buildings
•Policy, service provision and processes
•Staff Travel Council Operations 
Emissions
•Behaviour Change
•District Travel
•Air Quality
•District Buildings
•Natural Environment 
•Waste
•Climate Change AdaptionDistrict
Emissions 4 
 Policy Context  
This document aligns with policy across the Council including the strategic objectives in the 
Corporate Plan  to keep  the district moving sustainably and enable residents to access new 
opportunities for employment and to reduce the carbon footprint across the district and within our 
council.  
The Council’s e merging Local Plan  contains a number of policies that align with the themes within 
this Action Plan. However, these policies only apply to new development and so this plan focuses on 
what we can do now.  Appendix 1 contains summaries of the following local plan pol 
DM1  Habitat protection and improving biodiversity  
DM2  Epping Forest SAC and t he Lee Valley SPA  
DM4  Green  belt 
DM5  Green and blue infrastructure  
DM9  High quality design  
DM10  Housing design and quality  
DM11  Waste recycling facilities in n ew developments  
DM12  Subterranean, basement development and lightwells  
DM15  Managing and reducing flood risk  
DM16  Sustainable drainage systems  
DM17  Protecting and enhancing water courses and flood defences  
DM18  On site management and r euse of w astewater and water supply  
DM19  Sustainable water use  
DM20  Low carbon and renewable energy  
DM21  Local environmental impacts, pollution and land contamination  
DM22  Air quality  
T1 Sustainable Transport  Choices 
T2 Safeguarding of routes and facilities  
 
Other related plans , strategies  and guidance:  
EFDC  Green Infrastructure Strategy  Primer 0  – July 2021 
EFDC Green Infrastructure Strategy Implementation: Enhancing our Existing Network 1  – July 2021  
EFDC Green Infrastructure Strategy Implementation: Landscape Led Design 2  – July 2021 
EFDC Green Infrastructure Strategy Implementation: Green Infrastructure in Strategic Allocations 3  – 
July 2021  
EFDC Green Infrastructure Strategy Implementation: Infrastructure Enhancement Projects 4  – July 
2021  
EFDC Interim Air Pollution Mitigation Strategy  – December 2020  
Essex Highways Epping Forest District Cycling Action Plan  – March 2018 
Green Arc Strategy  
Epping Forest District Council Infrastructure De livery  Plan  – September 2020  
EFDC Sustainability Guidance  & Checklist  Vol. 01 (Major Developments)  – March 2021  
EFDC Sustainability Guidance & Checklist Vol. 02 (Minor Developments)  – March 2021  
 
  5 
 Epping Forest District Council’s Own Emissions  
Baseline and Methodology  
Over  the 2020 /21 financ ial year the baseline carbon footprint  for the Council ’s own estate and 
service provision ha s been calculated  using information  and data from the 2018/19 financial year.  
The new baseline considers changes to the Council’s estate and has the most comprehensive data 
set before the Covid -19 pandemic caused  marked changes  in building usage and staff travel.  The 
baseline will give the figures for comparison against emissions re ported up to 2030.  
Where the term carbon emissions is  used throughout the Climate Change Action Plan , this refers to  
all Greenhouse Gases (GHGs)  expressed as carbon dioxide equivalents (CO 2e). The table below 
shows the GHG’s covered by the  Kyoto Protocol a nd where they come from.  
Greenhouse Gas  Where it comes from  
Carbon Dioxide  (CO 2) Power stations, transport, industrial and domestic power, cement 
production , general fuel combustion  
Methane  (CH 4) Landfill, agriculture and oil and natural gas operations  
Nitro us Oxide  (N2O) Fertiliser, road transport , industrial processes , fuel combustion  
Hydrofluorocarbons  (HFC’s)  Refrigerants  and air conditioning, foams and aerosols  
Perfluorocarbons  (PFC’s)  Electronics, aluminium production  
Sulfur  Hexafluoride (SF 6) Electricity transmission  and distribution  
Nitrogen Trifluoride (NF 3) Semiconductor  manufactur e 
 
The Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (BEIS) publishes GHG Conversion 
Factors each year to aid calculation of carbon emission s for a range of activities.  
To calculate the District’s carbon footprint,  we have used our own data multiplied by the BEIS 
emission factors  for that activity  to give the kilo grams  of carbon dioxide equivalent emitted. This is  
divided by 1000 to convert to tonnes.  
An example for energy use is:  
(Energy (kWh) x emissions  factor ) / 1000 = tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent   
Scope  of the Climate Change Action Plan  
 Previously the Council have repor ted Scope 1 and 2 emissions , with emissions from business travel 
and electricity transmission and distribution losses reported as Scope 3.  Carbon emissions are categorised into three groups to define how emissions are generated and 
who is responsible:  
Scope 1  Direct emissions from gas sources owned or controlled by an organisation. Including 
fuel combustion from heating buildings and council vehicle fleet.  
Scope 2  Emissions from the generation of purchased electricity consumed by an organisation. 
Including lighting, heating and cooling in buildings.  
Scope 3  All other  indirect emissions  from an  organisations activity  but from sources not 
owned or controlled by th at organisation . Includ ing emissions from  business travel  in 
cars not owned by the Council and  purchased good and services . 6 
 However, with the declaration of a Climate Emergency the Council recognises the need  to show 
leadership and demonstr ate collaboration with our partners  and suppliers  across the District. 
Therefore,  Scope 3 emissions reported will be expanded to cover purchased good and services , 
leased assets , waste  and staff commuting . Work is currently underway to establish the scale of 
emissions in some of these areas.  
The below tables and diagrams show the baseline emissions data the Council will use as a 
comparison for reporting up to 2030, unless stated the data is from the 2018/19 financial year.  
Scope 1 – Direct emissions from g as sources owned or controlled by the Council.  
Category  Tonnes of CO 2e  
Council Owned Operational Buildings  194 
Fleet Fuel  237 
Sheltered Housing  Gas 867 
Total  1297 
 
Scope 2 – Emission from generation of purchased electricity consumed by the Council  
Category  Tonnes of CO 2e 
Operational buildings  electricity  350 
Other purchased electricity  335 
Electricity Sheltered Housing  communal areas  85 
Total  770 
 
Scope 3 - All other indirect emissions from Council activity but from sources not owned or 
controlled by the Council  
Category  Tonnes of CO 2e 
Business Travel  (Grey Fleet)  103 
Leased Assets  including Social Housing  To be calculated  
Staff Commuting  To be calculated  
Purchased good s and services  To be calculated  
Transmission and distribution losses  74 
Waste services  To be calculated  
Total  TBC 7 
  
Figure 1. Councils Scope 1 and 2 emissions  
 
The total emissions from Council controlled (Scopes 1 and 2) sources is 2,067 tCO 2e, this is 
equivalent to 250 homes’ energy use for one year or 5.4 million  miles driven by an average 
passenger vehicle. The overall total including Scope 3 emissions is to be confirmed following further 
investigation.  
The scope of the Council’s operations is to include Qualis as a wholly  owned subsidiary of Epping 
Forest District Council. As a newly formed entity Qualis has not had any property or paid utility bills 
up to March 2021. From April 2021 t he Council will work closely with Qualis to collate scope  1 and 
scope 2 emissions data.  
  
Approach to offsetting  
Reducing emissions through direct interventions  will be the Council’s  main approach to becoming a 
carbon neutral organisation. But there will be a certain level of emissions which would not be 
possible to reduce within nine  years  either for practical or financial reasons .  
The Council are taking actions to increase tree planting and the provision of natural greens pace  in 
the District,  through an endorsed tree planting strategy and the Green Infrastructure Strategy.  By 
taking steps now on tree planting this will allow woodland to become more established by 2030.  The 
need for  further offsetting will be considered closer to 2030  having monitored the progress being 
made.  This will be influenced by the development of technology but  is likely to include consider ing 
renewable technologies .  
  
Operational 
Buildings Gas
9%Fleet Fuel 11%Operational 
Buildings 
Electricity 21%Other 
Purchased 
Electricity 15%Sheltered 
Housing Gas 
40%
Sheltered 
Housing 
Electricity 4%8 
 District Wide Emissions  
The Council’s pledge shows a commitment to be carbon neutral across the whole  District . Although 
the Council  are unable to directly control  District  wide emissions , statutory powers and our role of 
community leader  and facilitator can be used to influence emissions reductions . Data for these 
emissions comes from national data compiled for all local authorities in the UK, the  scope of the 
District’s emissions will be limited to Scope 1 and 2 emissions as realistically these are the emissions 
that c an be reasonably influenced.  
To become carbon neutral  on this scale  is a challenging task and this will require communities  and 
businesses to take responsibility by also making  significant emissions reductions. Changes in national 
policy and financial int ervention from the UK government , as well as advances in technology and 
decarbonisation of the national grid  will also be key to enable the District to becom e carbon neutral 
by 2030 . 
District Wide Emissions – Scopes 1 and 2  (SCATTER  Cities 2017 ) 
Category  Tonnes CO 2e 
District Waste  Operations  20,214  
Transport  (on-road, off road and aviation)  546,159  
Industry and Commercial  125,822  
Domestic  168,422  
Agriculture and Land Use  -13,052  
Total  837,565  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
It is also possible  to look at how well different parts of the District are performing using a tool called 
the Place -Based Carbon Calculator. It is a free tool that maps the carbon footprint of every 
neighbourhood in England.  Its purpose is to provide a resource for both councils and community 
organisations to help them plan and enact the changes that are needed to meet net- zero goals and 
their own climate emergency declarations. We will be using this information to look at areas in the 
District to help us understand where it may be helpful to focus some of our resources. It will also 
help local communities and businesses to understand what ac tivities are causing the greatest 
impacts and for us all to monitor progress over t ime. 
District Waste 
Operations , 2%
Transport , 65%Industry and 
Commercial , 
15%Domestic ,20%
Agriculture and 
Land Use , -2%
Figure 2. District Scope 1 and 2 emissions  9 
 Priority Actions for 2021/22   
Council Operations  
Action  Description  Timescale  Portfolio 
Holder  Resource  
Waste contract 
review  As part of the ongoing contract 
review, consideration is to be given to 
provision of low emissions refuse 
vehicles and route efficiencies to 
reduce emissions.  Now and 
ongoing  Environmental 
and Technical 
Services  Internal budget  
identified  
Staff Travel Plan  To adopt measures that support 
sustainable travel into employee's 
place of work  and by means of 
flexible working the need to travel to 
work will fall from around five days to 
two days per week.  Now and 
ongoing  Environmental 
and Technical 
Services  Internal budget  
identified  
Grounds 
Maintenance vehicle 
fleet upgrade  The EFDC Grounds Maintenance fleet 
is to be replaced in 2021 with lower 
emissions Euro VI vehicles  and EV’s 
where the market allows . 2021  Environmental 
and Technical 
Services  Internal b udget 
identified  
Carbon Literacy 
Training  Engagement and education of staff . May 2021  Customer and 
Corporate Services  Internal budget 
identified  
Measurement of 
Scope 3 emissions  Establish the Councils scope 3 
emissions and identify key areas 
where these can be reduced . March 
2021  Planning and 
Sustainability  Internal b udget 
identified  
 
District Wide Actions  
Action  Description  Timescale  Portfolio 
Holder / 
Partner  Resource  
Develop a 
communication and 
engagement plan to 
facilitate behaviour 
change across the 
District  Educate, persuade and incentivise 
behaviour change in sustainable 
travel, air quality and climate 
change.   
Newsletters, one stop shop website, 
collaboration with community 
groups and partners . 
Link co -benefits of action  such as 
health and wellbeing.  Now and 
ongoing  Planning and 
Sustainability  Internal budget 
for newsletter 
and website  
Initiatives to support 
walking, cycling and 
public transport use.  Investigation to implement 
recommendations and projects within the District. Includes Interim 
Public Transport Strategy, Essex 
Highways Study, Infrastructure 
Development plan and working with Essex County Council (ECC)  on 
Epping Forest Cycle Action Plan.  Now and 
ongoing  Planning and 
Sustainabilit y, 
ECC, Planning 
applicants  Through 
implementation 
of HGGT 
community  
masterplan sites, Planning Contributions  10 
 Electric Vehicle charge 
point provision  on 
Council land  Rapid charge  point provision in  car 
parks, leisure centres  and shopping 
centres.  Now and 
ongoing  Environmental 
and Technical 
Services  Potential for 
expenses to be 
covered by 
Network 
Operator  
Large Scale Tree 
planting Internal call for sites ongoing, 
strategy underwa y to start tree 
planting by end of March 2021. 
Includes tree planting ambition in 
the Green Infrastructure Strategy, 
the Essex Forest Initiative call for 
sites and the Green Arc . March 
2021  Planning and 
Sustainability  Budget  
identified , 
developer 
contributions  
Domestic energy 
efficiency  Installation of energy efficiency 
measures in low income, low 
efficiency homes.   April 
2021  Commercial 
and 
Regulatory 
Services  GHG LAD Phase 
2 grant funding 
 
  11 
 Council Operations  
Between  2008/09 and 2018/1 9 reported Council emissions decreased by 51% due to the 
implementation of more energy efficient technologies in our offices , the installation of solar panels  
and the decarbonisation  of the UK electricity grid.  This is a good basis to bu ild on but to become 
carbon neutral by 2030 further critical changes will be needed in the way  the Council  operates .  
Operational buildings and Council owned housing will need to be assessed on their ability to meet 
future needs and where suitable undertak e deep retrofit ting to improve their efficiency and 
resilience to the expected  effects of climate change . Modes of business travel and staff commuting 
will require a shift to active travel and the use of ultra -low emissions vehicles (ULEVs). Consideration 
of the Climate Emergency will be  required  in all service  areas to influence how services are delivered 
and how good s and services are procured .   
Previous Successes  
• In October  2020 the Council endorsed meeting Passivhaus standards  for new build Council 
Housing 
• In 2016 Solar PV was installed on Civic Centre offices roof and previously installed on the 
Limes Community Centre roof . 
• Refurbishment of the Civic include s more efficient boilers, lighting and heating controls,  
more efficient AHUs, 4 EV charge points and facilities  to provide for  cycling and active travel  
• In January 2021 a revised procurement strategy was adopted that puts more emphasis on 
climate change and social value  
• Up to the end of 2020/21, 2 Council owned  electric vehicles (EV’s) in the fleet  and 12-month  
trial of 1 electric transit van.  
• Reduction in business travel mileage reimbursement  in staff’s own cars (grey fleet)  
• In December 2020 g reener driver training  was conducted for those regularly driving fle et 
vehicles  
• Introduction of software to m ore accurate ly measure fleet emissions and fuel use  
• Rapid response to enable staff to work from home effectively during  the Civic refurbishment 
and Covid -19 pandemic  (includes process/system changes and grants for more ergonomic 
home office setup)  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 12 
 Actions   
Council Buildings  
Action  Activities  Timescale  Portfolio 
Holder  Resource  
Review energy 
efficiency of Council 
owned estate  Including operational buildings, 
community halls and the common 
parts of the sheltered housing units  
to assess and implement carbon 
reduction measures . Noting that 
the Condor Building is due to be 
vacated completely in early May 
and only two thirds of the 
remaining Civic Centre will be used 
by EFDC.  2021   Housing and 
Community 
Services  2021/22 – 
Internal 
budget 
identified  
2022/23 
onwards – 
capital budget 
to be 
requested  
 
Review renewable 
energy potential at 
existing council owned sites  Assessment of suitability for 
measures such as heat pumps, solar PV and solar thermal.  2021  Housing and 
Community Services  2021/22 -
Internal budget identified  
2022/23 onwards – 
capital budget to be 
requested  
Review energy 
efficiency of Council 
owned social housing 
provision  Build database to aid stock 
assessment processes  
Implementation of external wall 
insulation  
Deep retrofit energy assessments  Now and 
ongoing  Housing and 
Community 
Services  Grant funding  
Review opportunities 
for water saving initiatives  Investigate water saving 
opportunities the councils own estate and encouraging water 
saving behaviours from staff  TBC Housing and 
Community Services  TBC 
Best practice in new 
Council Developments  Planning applications for new 
council facilities  and developments  
to lead by example meeting 
Sustainability Guidance net zero by 
2030 levels  Now and 
ongoing  Ongoing  Developer  
Switch Utilities to 
renewable  energy  tariffs  Switch electricity tariffs to 100% 
REGO and /or GoO certified 
renewable energy.  
Investigate feasibility of switching 
to a ‘green’ gas supply.  Electricity - 
October  2021  Housing and 
Community 
Services  Internal 
utilities budget  
Minimise waste within 
the council offices and 
promote recycling  Drive forward paperless and digital 
working  to minimise paper waste.  
In line with procurement strategy 
consider ‘end of life’ requirements 
before purchasing goods.  
Information by bins to make 
recyclable waste clear   Now and 
ongoing  Environmental 
and Technical 
Services  Internal 
budget 
identified  13 
 Council Processes  and Behaviour Change  
Action  Activities  Timescale  Portfolio 
Holder  Resource  
Staff engagement and 
training to influence 
behaviour change  Carbon Literacy training  to be 
rolled out in stages across the 
organisation  May 2021  Customer and 
Corporate 
Services  Internal 
budget 
identified  
Include consideration of 
the Climate Emergency 
in Council decision 
making processes  Investigate how consideration of 
Climate Change can be embedded at the project concept stage 
through to cabinet decision reports  TBC    
Alignment of policy 
across the organisation 
to consider  the climate 
declaration  List and review of policies to align 
with climate pledge.  TBC   
Establish and analyse 
the Council's Scope 3 
emissions  Calculation and analysis of indirect 
Scope 3 emissions using financial 
data.  2021  Planning and 
Sustainability  Internal 
budget 
identified  
Identification of  carbon 
intensive contracts 
based on Scope 3 
emissions analysis  Assess carbon reduction 
opportunities and develop a 
carbon reduction plan to eliminate 
waste in the supply chain and 
engage suppliers.  2021/22  Planning and 
Sustainability  Internal 
budget 
identified  
 
Staff Travel  
Action  Activities  Timescale  Portfolio 
Holder  Resource  
Make the Council an 
exemplar on staff 
commuting and 
business travel  Use held data and staff surveys to 
identify, analyse and deploy viable 
options to increase sustainable 
commuting . 
Enter for Modeshift accreditation 
for Civic Travel Plan   2021/22  Environm ental 
and Technical 
Services   
Investigate options to 
encourage and 
incentivise sustainable commuting  Online personal travel planning 
tools, investigate bus/rail discounts, build on learnings from DRT trial to launch viable service, car share scheme launch, 
investigate park and ride options.  2021/22  Environmental 
and Technical Services   
Review the Council’s 
own ‘grey fleet’ policies  Investigate further changes to 
mileage rates . Develop policy on 
using own car for business travel.  TBC   
Business travel in staff 
owned cars ‘grey fleet’  Investigate demand for pool car 
options to increase % of electric vehicle mileage for business travel  To be 
reviewed on return to the 
office  Environmental 
and Technical Services   
Identify and bid for all 
OZEV and commercial 
funds to improve EV 
experience incl uding 
EFDC estate and fleet  Bid inputs given to ECC for 
OZEV/Connected Kerb funding bid 
for on -street EV chargers. Review 
of viability of emerging rapid Now and 
ongoing  Environmental 
and Technical 
Services  OZEV and 
other grant 
funding  14 
 charging network operators, 
suitable for EFDC estate use  
Improve experiences of 
EFDC staff working 
remotely to  reduce the 
need to  commute  and 
travel for business  Consider further access to EFDC 
sites closer to where staff may live and/or are visiting on business (eg. 
Museum, Oakwood Hill sites)  Now and 
ongoing  Environmental 
and Technical 
Services   
 
Monitoring   
Key Performance Indicator s Baseline  Target  
% reduction in reported Scope 1 and 2 Council 
emissions   2,168 tCO 2e TBC 
Average SAP rating of Council owned social 
housing  71 (201 1) TBC  
% of staff certified  as Carbon Literate  0% (2020/21)  TBC  
no. of electric vehicles in the fleet  2 (2020/21)  TBC 
% of staff using sustainable transport for their 
commute  XX% (2018 Staff Travel 
Survey)  TBC 
  15 
 District Wide Actions  
Behaviour Change  and Engagement  
To become a carbon neutral District by 2030 changes to  the way that we go about our daily lives will 
be needed to reduce emissions particularly from transport and energy use.  The Council  are unable to 
directly influence most  emissions within the District;  therefore,  the success of this Plan will be down 
to all of us . The Council will  build awareness and active ly engage  with the District’s  communit ies and 
businesses to ensure its success.  
Actions identified in this section of th e Plan will be supported by  raising awareness of the issues and 
opportunities , shar ing information on ways in which we can help become carbon neutral,  inspir ing 
behaviour change  and mak ing it as easy as possible for people to make the changes needed . Each  
theme contain s a section highlight ing planned behaviour change and engagement activity  to support 
residents, businesses and organisations in making informed choices  and taking climate change action  
themselves . Adopt ing changes  to help lower emissions also has many  co-benefits that will help to 
make the District a g reat place to live, work , learn and play  including through , improve health, result 
in better air quality and economic growth  as well as helping to save money . 
The District already has active community groups that focus on climate change and sustainable 
transport. By working together with these groups as well as our partners, broader community 
groups and the public, we are looking to  expand our communication channels  to reach a wide and 
varied audience.  
 
  16 
 District Travel  
65% of the District’s carbon emissions com e from on road transport sources . Maximising 
opportunities to make it easier for residents and businesses to change to using Ultra Low Emissions 
Vehicles (ULEV’s), encouraging sustainable transport choices and reducing the number of  journeys 
made by vehicles  is a major  component of this P lan. Emissions from petrol and diesel vehicles have 
also been shown to be harmful to both human health and the health of the Epping Forest Special 
Area of Conservation. There fore, actions in this area will have multiple and significant  benefits for 
the District  as a whole . 
The Epping Forest District Council area cont ains key transport corridors that are not under the 
Council ’s control including the M11 and M25 motorways and th e London Underground Central Line . 
The remainder of the road network is managed by Essex County Council . Although this makes 
influencing what we can achieve  more challenging there are opportunities to be innovative with 
proximity to transport hubs and to collaborate with ECC and transport operators such as TfL.  
Previous Successes  
• Focussing as much of the new development proposed in our emerging Local Plan in places 
which either have good sustainable transport provision or where new provision can be provided by the development proposed.  
• Policies in our emerging Local Plan  which  requir e the creation of viable sustainable transport 
corridors and choices, safeguarding of routes/facilities and better provision of Electric Vehicle ( EV) charg ing points . 
• DRT (DaRT87) bus service pilot launched, replacing Arriva 87 service which ECC declined to 
continue subsidising at end 2020  
• Funding and delivery of 10 public fast EV c hargers at Epping Forest Shopping Park  
• Development of our Interim Air Pollution Mitigation Strategy which supports our focus on 
the way we travel and for getting more people and businesses to buy ULEV’s.   
 
Actions  
Public transport –  Work with E ssex County Council  and operators to make bus services more 
attractive and financially viable  
Action  Activities  Timescale  Portfolio 
Holder / 
Partner  Resource  
Defend and grow bus 
usage  Understand and address declining 
bus patronage  and cessation of 
some subsidised routes. Work with 
ECC and operators to promote.  
Publicise public transport options 
available.  
Bus Back Better Initiative for the 
DfT for Essex to create enhanced 
partnership with bus operators  July 2021  ECC ECC 
Modern technology at 
stops and on vehicles to 
enhance public 
transport experience  Installation of real time travel 
information at train stations and bus stops across the district; 
contactless and app -based Now and 
ongoing  ECC Developer 
contributio ns, 
ECC 17 
 ticketing  and payment ; multi -
operator ticketin g. 
Explore potential  of 
new and more frequent 
bus services  to connect 
key settlements  Including  increased frequency of 
the Epping- Harlow and North 
Weald -Epping bus routes as 
suggested from EFDC Public 
Transport Infrastructure Strategy . 2016 -2031  ECC, 
Developer s, 
TfL, other 
operators  Developer 
contributions , 
ECC, transport  
operators  
Ensure emission levels 
from bus services are 
minimised.   Lobby and work with ECC, to 
specify low emission vehicles (Euro VI) when contracting subsidised and commercial bus services. Join low emission bus trials and funding 
bids.  
Engage with operators on Euro 
engine standards , new and battery 
or fuel -celled fleet  Now and 
ongoing   ECC, transport 
operators   
Facilitate and encourage 
sustainable public 
transport focus ing on 
rural communit y 
connection  to key 
settlements.  DRT bus service stipulated as part 
of Dowding Way development . 
Private DRT staff service in use: 
Epping station to North Weald 
HMRC customs site.   
DaRT87 DRT trial retaining 
Theydon Bois and Epping Green’ s 
access to public bus service.   
Investigate further DRT and 
community bus options.  2021  Environmental 
and Technical 
Services  Budget in 
place for 
DaRT87 trial  
Identify innovations 
likely to encourage DRT  
usage.  Phone booking service allows for 
inclusive  demographics and IT 
literacy  (concessionary passes 
accepted) . Now and 
ongoing  Environmental 
and Technical 
Services  Budget for 
payment app and contactless 
payment  
 
Active travel  
Action  Activities  Timescale  Portfolio 
Holder Area  Resource  
Create and improve 
active travel routes in 
rural and urban areas  Work with ECC Rights of Way and 
EFDC Green Infrastructure Strategy 
team  
Ensure footpath and  bridleway 
network maintenance plans meet 
resident’s needs . 
Improve signage and highlight 
‘short cut’ routes   Now and 
ongoing  Planning and 
Sustainability  Developer 
contributions  
Encourage active travel 
to schools to a ddress 
the impact of school traffic  Investigate community travel for 
school journeys, reinstate walking buses . 
Supporting school streets and 
school travel plans  TBC ECC ECC 18 
 Support  and influence 
Essex County Council 's 
cycling strategy .  Pan-authority meeting s with 
adjoining boroughs  started . To 
engage with Conservators of 
Epping Forest and the City of 
London.  
Engage with ECC cycling strategy 
team on urban options eg. 
collaboration with Redbridge 
Council on extending segregated 
lanes to Buckhurst Hill LCWIPs 
required to justify this  and other 
ideas.  
Work with ECC to implement 
flagship Waltham Abbey cycle  
route as described in the Cycling 
Action Plan   2021 /22 Conservators 
of Epping 
Forest,  
CoL, ECC   
Raise standards and 
availability of cycle 
parking  Including at tube stations where 
some inadequacies noted. Engage with new Town Centres manager 
and Planning. Review best practice 
for new developments.   Now and 
ongoing  Environmental 
and Technical 
Services , ECC, 
Parish and 
Town Councils  Internal 
budget identified in 
some areas  
Review of one-way 
streets to assess scope 
for contraflows for 
walking and cycling 
lanes  To improve active travel network  TBC EFDC, ECC, 
Developers  Developer 
contributions, 
grant funding 
Commission Local 
Cycling and Walking 
Infrastructure Plans  Done for Harlow/HGGT. Funding 
bids required for others.  
To start in the South West of the 
District and Epping.   TBC   
 
Electric Vehicles and Electric Vehicle Infrastructure  
Action  Activities  Timescale  Portfolio 
Holder/ 
Partner  Resource  
Increase availability of 
public EV charge points  In EFDC car parks and at public 
visitor trip attractors including 
private sector sites via Economic 
Development team.  
Active engagement with innovative 
providers of public rapid charge 
sites.  
Parking team feasibility review of 
EFDC car park EV bays, streetlight 
EV charging , power supply 
constraints  Now and 
ongoing  Environmental 
and Technical 
Services  Network 
providers,  
Finance from 
EFDC  
Work with Essex 
Highways to provide on 
street charging 
infrastructure  Awaiting result of Connected 
Kerb/OZEV on -street charging bid 
via ECC  Now and 
ongoing  Environmental 
and Technical Services  
ECC ECC, grant 
funding  19 
 Call for sites to understand EV 
charging demand and appraisal to 
ensure suitability  
Engage with T axi licence holders to 
understand where home 
infrastructure is required  
Secure a switch from 
petrol cars to Ultra Low 
Emissions Vehicles    Preferential car parking rapid 
charging for electric vehicles   
Awareness raising  of incentives to 
switch  
Provision of EV charging points in 
developments  
Potential for scrappage scheme  Now and 
ongoing  Planning and 
Sustainability, 
Environmental 
and Technical 
Services   
Raise awareness of 
funding for off street charging points for residents and 
businesses  Working with EFDC Economic 
Development team and innovative providers to identify suitable high traffic sites  Now and 
ongoing  Planning and 
Sustainability  N/A 
 
Engagement with residents, community groups and businesses to secure behaviour change  
Action  Activities  Timescale  Portfolio 
Holder / 
Partners  Resource  
Develop a 
communication and 
engagement plan to 
facilitate behaviour 
change across the 
District  Aim to educate, persuade and 
incentivise behaviour change in 
travel, air quality and climate 
change . 
Health  and its relationship to active 
travel   Now and 
ongoing  Environmental 
and Technical 
Services , 
Planning and 
Sustainability   
Identify and engage 
community groups and influencers.  Epping Forest Transport Action 
Group (EFTAG) , Epping Forest 
Climate Action Group (EFCAG ), 
EFDC community wellbeing initiatives, sport -driven schemes, 
NHS/ CCG/ GP led active travel 
messaging  Now and 
ongoing  Environmental 
and Technical Services  N/A 
Help ECC target their 
business, housing 
development and 
schools Travel Plan (TP) 
processes to all suitable 
large sites in the District  ECC TP guidance and process 
review.  
Large TPs need to be secured via 
Section 106 to ECC T ravel Plan 
team for 5 -year  monitoring post -
build.   2021  ECC ECC 
Work with Conservators 
of Epping Forest and Essex County Council  to 
encourage development of a Transport Access 
Management Strategy 
for Epping  Forest.  Encourage visits to the forest by 
means other than the Car  
eg. developing a low emission 
Forest shuttle for visitors/ramblers.   Ongoing  Conservators 
of Epping Forest, ECC   20 
 Design and run local 
social media and press 
campaigns to promote 
new  and existing 
services  To increase bus use, car share, EV 
take up and active travel  
Use demographic tools to 
understand local populations .   Now and 
ongoing  Environmental 
and Technical 
Services  Internal 
budget  
Analyse trends for 
increased District van  
and light HGV traffic  Management of home delivery 
growth  TBC   
Promote car share 
options to residents and 
businesses.  Re-promotion of ‘Liftshare’ website  
Explore available data in 
partnership with the NHS to 
identify car share bubbles  Now and 
ongoing  Environmental 
and Technical 
Services   
Identify  broadband gaps  
and areas with no fibre 
to the premises (FTTP) option  to support home 
working  Support of early 5G rollout in 'not -
spot'/rural areas. Digital Innovation Zone (DIZ) programme and Essex Broadband Improvement 
programme   Now and 
ongoing  Digital 
Innovation 
Zone  
Stipulate the most 
futureproof FTTP 
options in new 
developments.  Developer toolkit to ensure FTTP 
from outset.  Openreach, 
Gigaclear, Hyperoptic, 5G 
operators have incentives and 
offers for developers/L As, to 
identify and exploit  Now and 
ongoing  Planning 
applicants  Section 106 
and/or 
planning 
conditions  
Encourage co-working 
spaces for start -up 
business sites within 
large developments  Engage with Business Development 
team, Qualis  Now and 
ongoing  Digital 
Innovation 
Zone 
Reduce number of 
journeys by i ncreas ing 
EFDC’s remote 
touchpoints for  public 
and businesses . Work with other businesses and 
public entities like NHS.  
EFDC customer service s looking at 
online/cashless service delivery  
and support to bridge the ‘digital 
divide’   TBC   
Explore public co -
working from EFDC offices  potentially  at 
North Weald  Airfield  Engage with EFDC Economic 
Development team, Qualis, DIZ   TBC   
 
Monitoring  
Key Performance Indicator  Baseline  Target  
No. of EV chargers on Council public land  0   TBC 
  21 
 Air Quality  
As well as impacting on the District’s natural environment, and particularly the Epping Forest, poor 
air quality is detrimental to people’s health. Poor air quality (including as a result of particulate 
matter) arises from sources and activities including;  vehicle emissions (including particulate matter 
from engines, brake pads and tyres), industrial processes, domestic and commercial gas and use of 
other fossil fuels, energy generation, agriculture, non -road mobile machinery, rail and construction 
activiti es to name a few. Air pollution is associated with many adverse health impacts including 
being a recognised contributing factor in the onset of heart disease, cancer and respiratory 
problems.  
Air pollution particularly affects the most vulnerable in socie ty: children and older people, and those 
with heart and lung conditions. There is also often a strong correlation with equalities issues, 
because often less affluent areas are more densely populated and located closer to roads and near 
to industrial areas with poor air quality. The annual cost to society of the impacts of particulate 
matter alone in the UK is estimated to be around £16 billion. Measures in this plan look to mitigate 
the negative impacts of poor air quality on human health and support the de livery of the Council’s 
Air Quality Action Plan and Interim Air Pollution Mitigation Strategy (IAPMS). The IAPMS has been 
developed to avoid causing harm to the Epping Forest Special Area of Conservation (SAC) from traffic 
on roads passing through it, reco gnising that it is already under pressure due to both traffic levels 
and the harmful emissions created by petrol and diesel cars. Many of the actions in this Plan will be beneficial to responding to both our climate change and air quality issues.  
Previous Successes  
• Adoption of Interim Air Pollution Mitigation Strategy for the Epping Forest SAC.  
• The Council’s Local Plan includes policies which seek to address air quality issues for both 
human and ecological health.  
• Clean Air Day held annually with the aim of improv ing public understanding and awareness 
of air pollution  and how it affects our health . Also e xplain ing easy action,  we can all take  to 
tackle air pollution.  
• Adoption of anti -idling legislation.  
• Nitrogen Dioxide is monitored across the District using  ongoing assessment, and appropriate 
action is taken if elevated concentrations are identified. This is reviewed annually.  
• A bespoke monitoring framework has been established for monitoring progress on avoiding 
harm to the Epping Forest SAC.  
Actions  
Initiative/Activity  Description  Timescale  Portfolio 
Holder/ 
Partner  Resource  
Liaise with internal 
departments on the 
emerging Local Plan 
ensuring policies 
facilitate mitigation to 
protect human health  Develop a guide for developers to 
outline Council expectations when 
assessing the impact of 
development on Air Quality and 
incorpor ate appropriate mitigation 
to minimise any impacts  2021   Commercial 
and 
Regulatory 
Services  Internal 
budget 
identified  22 
 Reduce concentrations 
of nitrogen dioxide in 
the Bell Common AQMA to below the objective  Liaise with Epping Forest 
Conservators and ECC Highways to improve air quality in the Air Quality Management Area, with the aim of making sufficient 
progress to continue updating the 
Air Quality Action Plan.  2021  Commercial 
and 
Regulatory Services  Internal  
budget identified  
Reduce impacts of new 
development on 
existing receptors and 
ensure new 
developments are not 
subjected to poor air 
quality  Work with the Council’s 
Development Management Service  
to update standard conditions on 
planning applications, ensuring 
they address current and future 
issues resulting from development.  2021  Commercial 
and 
Regulatory 
Services  Internal 
budget 
identified  
 
Engagement and promotion of incentives to encourage be haviour change  
Initiative/Activity  Description  Timescale  Portfolio 
Holder  Resource  
Idling vehicles 
promotion campaign 
and enforcement  Continue to raise  awareness of the 
impacts of idling vehicles and that 
idling is an offence that may lead 
to a fixed penalty notice ( FPN). Use 
of powers granted to nominated 
officers in respect of the issuing 
of FPNs for idling stationary 
vehicles.  2021  Commercial 
and 
Regulatory 
Services  Internal 
budget 
identified  
Campaign Raising 
Awareness of the 
effects of air pollution on the Epping F orest  
SAC  Highlight  the long -term effects  on 
habitat  associated with driving 
through the Forest . Information on 
grants , incentives and benefits 
when  switching to electric vehicles.  2021  Planning and 
Sustainability  Internal 
budget identified  
 
Monitoring  
Monitoring will be undertaken in accordance with the Council’s Air Quality responsibilities and as set 
out in the Council’s Interim Air Pollution Mitigation Strategy for the Epping Forest SAC. District Travel 
is closely linked to air quality therefore monitoring from this area will also inform progress.  
 
 
 
  
 23 
 District Wide Buildings  
Up to  20% of the District’s  carbon emissions  come  from the electricity and gas used  to light, heat 
and cool buildings . This is second only to emissions from transport . If we are  to become carbon 
neutral by 2030 this will be a key area that we need to address . 
All new buildings are therefore expected to adopt an  approach  which maximises energy efficiency 
through the their design and the materials used for their construction , minim ise emissions from 
energy use, ensure fossil fuel free generation of energy  (which will also help to improve local air 
quality)  and be able to adapt to climate change. Existing buildings  will need to be assessed on their 
suitability to meet carbon efficien cy standards in the future and where appropriate  undertake  
retrofit ting to be more efficient and  resilient to the  effects of climate change . 
The Council’s e merging L ocal Plan policies and its supporting Sustainability Guidance gives the 
Council  the ability to embed climate change and air pollution measures into new development . This 
goes beyond just reducing carbon emissions. However, it has  less influence over what happens  to 
existing buildings in private ownership whether they be homes or premises.  The Council will work to 
engage with property owners and landowners  to highlight the importance of , and opportunities for,  
introducing climate change measures and behaviours as well as the incentives available to undertake  
improvements. This work will also need to be supported by the UK government to introduce  
legislation and funding opportunities t hat help the residents, businesses and landowners in the  
District implement the required measures .  
Previous Successes  
• The Council’s e merging Local Plan provides policies to improve the sustainability and 
resilience of new buildings and places.  
• The S ustainability Guidance  Vol.01 Major Developments and Vol.02 Mi nor developments  
sets out clear expectations for the design, energy consumption , provision of sustainable 
transport opportunities  and use of renewable energy in  new developments.  
• Support of the Energy Company Obligation (ECO 3 Flex) funding for energy efficiency 
improvements in domestic properties . This funding has  help ed 175  households cut their 
energy bills and reduce carbon emissions since May 2019.  
• Decent Homes Repayable Assistance or Small Works Grant are available to eligible residents 
in the private sector whose homes fail the Decent Homes Standard. The Small Works Grant 
is specifically for thermal comfort.  
• A successful consortium bid with Essex County Council and seven  other District Councils for 
grant funding ( Green Homes Grant Local Authority Delivery Phase 1A ) to install insulation 
measures in private domestic properties at risk of fuel poverty . 
 
Actions  
New Developments  
Action  Activities  Timescale  Portfolio 
Holder / 
Partners  Resource  
Sustainability Guidance  
Vol.01  (Major 
Developments) and 
Vol.02 (Minor Encourages fabric first and sound 
design approaches.  
Considers Energy Efficiency and 
Carbon, Renewable Energy, Green Endorsed by  
Cabinet in 
March 2021  Planning and 
Sustainability  Internal 
budget 
identified  24 
 Developments); 
developed as material 
planning considerations  Infrastructure, Sustainable 
Movement, Water, Ci rcular 
economy, Waste  Management, Air 
Quality and Social and Economic 
impacts  
Sustainability Guidance 
Vol.03 (E xtensions and 
refurbishments ); 
developed as material 
planning consideration  The document will aid submission 
of planning applications and inform 
asset owners of sustainability 
expectations.  March 2021  –
approv ed by 
Cabinet for public 
consultation  Planning and 
Sustainability  Internal 
budget 
identified  
Training of Planning 
Officers on use  of the  
suite of Sustainability 
Guidance documents  To guide the assessment of 
planning applications within the 
District, inform pre -application 
discussions and assist sustainable 
decision making.  2021  Plannin g Team  Internal 
budget 
identified  
Harlow and Gilston 
Garden Town  
Sustainability Guidance  
and checklist.    Applies to the Garden Town 
masterplan sites within the District. 
Aims to help applicants meet the 
Garden Town goals of becoming 
net zero -carbon by 2030, and, to 
build strong and integrated 
communities across new and 
existing places.  Endorsed by 
Cabinet in 
March 2021  East Hert s 
District Council  
Harlow District 
Council , ECC,  
Hert s County 
Council  Internal 
budget 
identified  
 
Existing Buildings  
Action  Activities  Timescale  Portfolio 
Holder/ 
Partners  Resource  
Facilitate domestic 
energy efficiency 
improvements  Installation of energy efficiency 
measures in low income, low 
efficiency homes using grant 
funding.  
Maximise opportunities from 
central government grant funding.  April 2021  Commercial 
and 
Regulatory 
Services  Green Homes 
Grant Local 
Authority 
Delivery Phas e 
2 
 
Engagement and promotion of incentives to encourage behaviour change  
Action  Activities  Timescale  Portfolio 
Holder/ 
Partners  Resource  
Education and 
empowerment of 
residents to encourage 
reduction of household 
emissions  Campaigns to l ink emissions 
reductions to health, indoor air 
quality, savings on energy bills  
Housing Newsletter  March 2021 
onwards  Planning and 
Sustainability  Internal 
budget  
Proactively engage  with  
housing associations to 
understand their carbon 
reduction plans  Highlight incentives related to 
implementing energy efficient and low carbon solutions.  
Introduce Carbon Literacy Training.  2021 onwards  Housing 
Associations  N/A 25 
 Actively engage with 
landlords and residents 
to promote grants that 
improve home energy 
efficiency  Promotion of scheme s on Council 
tax bills.  
Research inefficient housing and 
those at risk of fuel poverty  to 
target  
Publicise to t enant associations  
and through the Council’s housing 
newsletter  Now and 
ongoing  Landlord 
associations 
and residents’ 
groups   
Encourage businesses to 
take- up grants to 
implement carbon 
reduction initiatives  Investigate and publicise upcoming 
finance available  through 
businesses newsletter . 
Highlight other incentives eg.  Tax 
based incentives for green 
improvements  Now and 
ongoing   N/A 
Encourage Community 
Energy initiatives  Suitable  buildings  for solar PV 
engagement with local groups . 
Promote funding available  such as 
Solar Together  Now and 
ongoing  Residents 
associations, 
housing 
associations, 
community 
groups   
 
Monitoring  
Key Performance Indicator  Baseline  Target  
TBC TBC TBC 
 
  26 
 Natural Environment  
The character of Epping Forest District is defined by large areas of agricultural land, the ancient 
Epping Forest  and other area important for their biodiversity,  pockets of woodland and mature trees 
as well as large areas of common land . Epping Forest provides important  habitat and is labelled as a 
Special Area of Conservation (SAC ). Therefore, this plan along with other Council policies , plans and 
strategies aims to protect the SAC by reducing emissions and air pollution while also creating new, 
and enhance existing, natural greenspace to alleviate recreational pressure on the Forest.  This will 
also support climate change and biodiversity objectives.  
The District  is also home to the Roding Valley Meadows Site of Special Scientific in terest, nine  other 
nature reserves and the Roding, Stort  and Le a rivers together with their tributaries. This green and 
blue infrastructure  is important to help mitigate against climate change by  contribut ing to carbon 
storage, cooling and shading, opportu nities for species migration to more suitable habitats, and the 
protection of water quality and other natural resources. It can also be an integral part of providing 
multifunctional approaches to securing sustainable drainage and natural flood risk managem ent 
measures . By conserving and enhancing the natural environment we can therefore bring a range of 
benefits, including addition al storage for carbon, ecological connectivity, increased biodiversity  and 
opportunities for communities to engage with nature t o increase their health and wellbeing.   
Previous Successes  
• Development  of a Green Infrastructure S trategy  (GIS) to ensure that high quality Green and 
Blue Infrastructure, including the provision of Suitable Alternative Natural Green Space 
(SANG) and Infras tructure Enhancement Projects are  delivered alongside the growth 
proposed in the District as part of the emerging Local Plan.  
• Tree planting activities  at 16 schools in the area  
• Promotion of community tree planting offers to Parish and Town Councils  
• Development of the Longfields Allotment  in Waltham Abbey  in Summer 2020 . The planting 
planner includes crop rotation and enhancement of the growing space to  produce edible 
plants.  
Actions 
Action  Activities  Timescale  Portfolio 
Holder / 
Partners  Resource  
Movement and 
wayfinding - Developing 
and supporting the 
implementation of a 
Strategy for the 
enhancement of the  
District’s Public Rights 
of Way (PRoW) network  Provision of improved signage, 
removal of physical barriers to 
support access for all, provide 
more complete routes across the 
PRoW network and the 
introduction of maintenance 
regimes.   2021 onwards  Planning and 
Sustainability,  
ECC,  
Parish and 
Town Counci ls Developer 
contributions, 
Highways 
England, 
Active travel 
grants  
Increase the amount of 
natural and semi-
natural greenspace  Such as t he linking of different 
greenspaces to connect open 
space, link ing of settlements, and 
provi sion of  improved wildlife 
habitats.  2021 -2033  
alongside  
Local Plan 
development  Planning and 
Sustainability  Developer 
contributions  27 
 Roadside wildflowers - 
To implement cutting 
regimes for roadside 
verges, and undertake 
the seeding of areas,  
to provide for the 
creation of wildflower 
verges.  Work with ECC and Highways 
England to identify verges and 
roadside areas that are 
appropriate for wildflower 
planting.  
Encourage local communities to 
identify local opportunities for 
highway verge wildflower planting.  2021 o nwards  EFDC 
Countrycare,  
ECC, Highways  
England  Existing 
highway 
maintenance 
budgets, 
Plantlife, Biffa 
Award for 
Rebuilding 
Biodiversity  
Community Greenspace 
Improvements  - through 
a community -led design 
approach, by 
developing 
a toolkit of guidance on initiatives and stewardship strategies.  Seek nominations from 
community -based organisations to 
establish a trial project.  
Advice provided by the Council and its Countrycare Service in relation to maintenance, stewardship and funding application s. 2021 Onwards  EFDC 
Countrycare, Community Groups  
Parish and 
Town Councils  The National 
Lottery Community Fund,  
Groundwork, s106 planning obligations,  
Town and Parish Council 
precepts   
Veteran Tree 
Management Plan  Measures to address possible 
effects of predicted increases in 
nitrogen deposition rate s. 
Potential to include further EFDC 
managed woodlands and veteran 
trees.  2021 plan 
adoption,  
Then on -going  
implementation  Planning and 
Sustainability,  
Conservators 
of Epping 
Forest  Financial 
contributions 
from planning 
applications  
Tree planting strategy  - 
new tree planting on appropriate sites , can 
be on rural or urban sites, and range from a few trees to extensive 
woodland  Implementation of a strategy  to 
significantly increas e tree and 
hedge planting across the District .  
In partnership with parish and 
town councils and community 
groups,  help t o implement planting 
using ‘Right Tree Right Place’ principles .  
Work with E CC to coordinate 
schemes as part of the Essex 
Forest Initiative . Now and 
ongoing Planning and 
Sustainability , 
ECC, Parish  
and Town  
Councils , 
Schools , 
Landowners  Developer 
contributions,  
Capital budget , grant 
funding for community 
groups  
 
Engagement and education to encourage behaviour change  
Action  Activities  Timescale  Portfolio 
Holder/ 
Partners  Resource  
Engagement of 
residents in community 
growing projects  Residents to l earn about and 
experience the wildlife attracted by 
the growing projects.  
Creation of planted sensory  zones  
for wellbeing and to encourage 
biodiversity.   
Involvement of schools with 
recycling and planting projects.  
Weekly gardening sessions to learn 
organic growing methods, how to Now and 
ongoing  Housing and 
Community 
Services  Internal 
budget  28 
 attract  and provide for  biodiversity  
and the health, cultural and 
environmental benefits of growing 
techniques.  
 
Monitoring  
Key Performance Indicator  Baseline  Target  
% of the high -quality Green  
Infrastructure projects in th e Green 
Infrastructure  Strategy that have been delivered.  0% 56% by 2026  
Number of trees planted  within the District  Xx (2018/19)  TBC 
  29 
 Waste 
District wide waste and its disposal contributes up to 2% of emissions  in the District . Whilst Essex 
County Council is responsible for decisions relating to the District’s waste management  disposal 
options , Epping Forest District Council  has a clear a mbition of prevent ing waste going to landfill. 
Therefore, the Council will continue  to encourage residents and organisations to do everything they 
can to accord with the waste hierarchy where reduction is the main  priority  followed by reuse, 
recycling and recovery with  disposal being the  last resort .  
Through the Council’s emerging Local Plan policies and Sustainability Guidance developers will be 
expected to incorporate  solutions  to achieving waste reduction at the design stage by increasing 
recycling opportunities and reducing household residual waste. Developers will need  to provide 
operational waste strategies, contribute to waste reduction and design in areas for local food 
production.  New developments within Epping For est District Council are also expected to promote 
the circular economy and be designed to reduce construction waste.  
Previous Successes  
• Campaigns have been run on a twice -yearly  basis  to help reduce different sources of waste  
across the District . Examples include signing up to reduce plastic waste, home composting, 
stamp out junk mail, shop Eco  and the  Food Love rs Cookbook .  
• Trial W aste Electrical and Electronic Equipment (WEEE)  bins were introduced to a sample  
selection  of flats in  December  2020 to encourage recycling of electrical items that would 
have gone to landfill.  
• From June 2020 up to the present there has been a roll out of further food waste bins in flats  
to increase recycling rates . 
 
Actions  
Action  Activities  Timescale  Portfolio 
Holder  
/Partner  Resource  
Improve recycling and 
food waste collection in 
flatted areas.  
 Clear and accessible 
communications at  the point of 
disposal .  
Consultation with stakeholders to 
introduce more bespoke 
collections.  
Design communal bin areas to 
increase acc essibility  and housing 
of bin compounds  Now and 
ongoing  Environmental 
and Technical 
Services  Internal 
budget 
identified  
Facilitate further 
recycling opportunities 
for residents   Expansion of WEEE flat collection 
scheme.  
Investigate service improvements 
that would lead to higher recycling rates eg. Hessian sacks , research 
on mattress recycling . Now and 
ongoing  Environmental 
and Technical 
Services  TBC for service 
improvements such as hessian sacks  
Development of 
Personal Digital To record data on bin 
contamination and repairs . 2021 onwards  Environmental 
and Technical 
Services  Internal 
budget 
identified  30 
 Assistant  (PDA)  devices 
and software  Potential to inform future  
campaign s. 
Encourage innovation in 
waste reduction and 
collection in new developments   Planning applicants are to explore 
innovative ways to reduce waste at the design stage  by increas ing 
recycling opportunities and  
reduc ing household residual waste .  2021 onwards  Planning  and 
Sustainability  Developer s 
Wider provision of 
recycling bins in public 
areas  With recycling information for the 
area on show.  
 Now and 
ongoing  Environmental 
and Technical 
Services  Internal 
budget 
identified  
Review of waste 
contract  To minimise emissions from waste 
collections and ensure climate change taken into account  
Review options for waste depot 
site.  2021/22  Environmental 
and Technical 
Services  Internal 
budget identified  
Essex Waste Partnership  New legislation under consultation 
for plastic deposit schemes and 
waste practices expected in 2030. 
Work together on c ounty wide 
initiatives and campaigns . 2023  ECC TBC 
 
Education and e ngagement to encourage behaviour change of businesses, organisations and 
residents  
Action  Activities  Timescale  Portfolio 
Holder 
/Partner  Resource  
Promot e good 
household recycling 
practices  Information campaign on recycling 
and contaminates to reduce high 
contamination rates.   Now and 
ongoing  Environmental 
and Technical 
Services  Internal 
budget 
identified  
Household waste 
reduction  Reinvigorate behaviour change 
through publicity and awareness 
campaigns  TBC Environmental 
and Technical 
Services  Internal 
budget 
identified  
Promote a reduction in 
commercial waste  Educate businesses on  circular 
economy principles  to encourage 
waste reduction  
Consider s upportive business rates  
and licensing conditions for 
businesses reducing food waste  
and/or eliminating single use 
plastic  2021  Environme ntal 
and Technical 
Services  Internal 
budget 
identified  
 
Monitoring  
Key Performance Indicator  Baseline  Target  
% kerbside waste that is recycled, reused or 
composted  59%  65% by 2030  31 
 Climate Change Adaption  
The expected impacts of climate change in the East of England include experiencing  drier, hotter 
summers and wetter  winters. Less rainfall in summer coupled with the District ’s growing population, 
changing land use and a  finite supply of water means action  to secure availability of water for the 
future  is required now . The Environment Agency has identified the District as being in an area of 
‘serious water stress’. It is important that any new development does not lead to an overall increase 
in demand for w ater and that general water use in the District is reduced .  
The heavier and more frequent rainfall expected in winter will increase the scale and severity of flooding in the District. The incorporation of sustainable drainage systems (SuDS)  in new 
develop ments will limit surface run off by  mimicking  natural drainage and encourag ing passive 
infiltration and attenuation. To make effective use of existing and planned drainage infrastructure, rainwater should be managed as a valuable resource rather than a was te product. A multi -functional 
approach to the delivery of SuDS can help to provide interest in the provision of public open space 
and increase biodiversity.   In addition,  existing households and premises can take action to reduce 
their water consumption.  
Previous Successes  
• The Local Plan puts in place an approach which will secure the incorporation of water saving 
measures and provide targets for water efficiency standards.   
• The Council’s Sustainability Guidance that supports  a number of  policies within the Council’s 
emerging  Local Plan policies require s most  new development to  make provisions for SuDs, 
water saving measures and promote the use of rainwater harvesting and grey water 
recycling measures.  
 
Actions  
Action  Activities  Timeline  Portfolio 
Holder / 
Partners  Resource  
Tree planting for flood 
resilience  100 trees to be planted in the 
Roding Valley  2021  Environmental 
and Technical 
Services  Internal 
budget 
identified  
Investigate 
opportunities with 
partner organisations for example the Environment Agency to 
support mitigation 
projects  Opportunities to support work on 
the River Lee catchment  2021  Environment 
Agency   
 
Education and engagement to encourage action from businesses, organisations and residents  
Action  Activities  Timeline  Portfolio 
Holder/ 
Partners  Resource  
Information to  
residents , businesses 
and landowners to Including flooding, water shortages 
and heat waves . TBC   32 
 prepare for predicted 
climate change  effects  Ventilation and protection from 
over heating  
Increase of water storage  
Encourage retrofit of 
water conservation 
measures  in housing 
and businesses  Rainwater harvesting and 
greywater re- use 
Promotion of water saving kits  
Through website information  
 TBC   
Encourage retrofit of 
measures to protect 
from overheating in 
housing and businesses  Passive solar shading methods and 
low energy ventilation to be 
explored  TBC   
 
  33 
 Appendix 1  - Glossary  
AQMA - Air Quality Management Areas are designations used by DEFRA (Department for 
Environment, Food and Rural Affairs) to manage areas with air pollution, that are unlikely to meet  
the Government’s national air quality objectives.  
Air Quality Action Plan  - A document produced by the Council with Natural England setting out the 
steps that will be taken to reduce pollution within an Air Quality Management Area (AQMA). This 
could include steps to reduce car usage and promote public transport.  
Biodiversity  - The variety of plant and animal life in the world or in a particular  habitat , a high level of 
which is usually considered to be important and desirable.  
Carbon Footprint  - The amount of carbon dioxide released into the atmosphere as a result of the 
individual , organisation or community  
Carbon Literacy  - The awareness of climate change and the impact of human s on the  global climate.  
Carbon Neutral  - no net release of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere, w here some emissions 
remain  these emissions are offset making the overall carbon dioxide emissions zero.  
Carbon Offset  - the process of trying to reduce the impact of releasing  carbon dioxide into the 
environment by doing other things t o remove atmospheric carbon dioxide, for example, by planting 
trees  
Circular Economy  - The circular economy is a model of production and consumption, which involves 
sharing, leasing, reusing, repairing, refurbishing and recycling existing materials and products as long 
as possible. In this way, the life cycle of products is extended.  
Climate Change  - A large -scale, long -term shift in the planet's weather patterns and average 
temperatures.  
Climate Emergency  - The intention to take immediate action and develop policy to mitigate climate 
change beyond current government targets and international agreements.  
DRT - Demand -responsive transport is a user -oriented form of passenger transport characterised by 
flexible  routes and smaller vehicles operating in shared -ride mode between pick -up and drop -off 
locations according to passengers needs  
EV – Electric Vehicles.  
EPC – Energy Performance Certificate. A requirement under The Energy Performance of Buildings 
(Certific ates and Inspections) (England and Wales) Regulations 2007 for properties to have a valid 
EPC (valid for 10 years) when the property is rented or sold. The EPC provides an indicative rating for the energy efficiency of the property and an indicative rating  for retrofit improvements that could be 
made.  
Fabric First  - buildings are designed so that they are extremely efficient and need less energy than a 
building of standard construction. This is done through several methods including maximising 
airtightness , insulation, optimising solar gain using openings and shading, optimising natural 
ventilation, using thermal mass of the building fabric and using energy generated by occupants and 
equipment.  34 
 GoO  –   A Guarantee of Origin is a document that proves the ori gin of electricity from a specific 
energy source. A guarantee of origin enables the traceability of renewable  energy from the producer 
to the final consumer.  It is worth noting that  electricity networks provide electricity from mixed 
sources to the end use r the document shows that the share of energy was produced from renewable 
sources . 
Green House Gas  - a gas that absorb s infrared radiation and reradiating it back to Earth's surface 
contributing to the greenhouse effect.  
Green Tariff – A portion of or all the electricity purchased is matched by purchased or generation of 
renewable energy from the energy supplier. Renewable energy can be from sources such as wind, 
solar, tidal, hydroelectric  or nuclear energy. Some tariffs do not contain nuclear energy.  
Grey Fleet  - is a term used to describe the business miles travelled by an employee in their own 
vehicle.  
IPCC  – Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, who published a special report in 2018 on the 
impacts of global warming of 1.5 degre es Celsius.  
LCWIP  - Local Cycling and Walking Infrastructure Plans  
Modal Shift -  Modal shift means a switching of energy consumption methods, such as when people 
switch from fossil fuel reliant forms of transport (such as cars) to sustainable transportatio n options 
such as busses, trains and (electric) bicycles.  
OZEV  – The Office for Zero Emissions Vehicles formerly the Office for Low Emissions Vehicles ( OZEV ) 
Passivhaus - a building in which thermal comfort can be achieved solely by post -heating or post -
cooling the fresh air flow required for a good indoor air quality, without the need for additional 
recirculation of air.  
PV – photovoltaics, also known as solar panels. PV is a technology that converts sunlight into 
electricity through its solar photovoltaic  cells.  
Renewable Energy -  Renewable energy is energy that is collected from renewable resources, which 
are naturally replenished on a human timescale, such as sunlight, wind, rain, tides, waves, and 
geothermal heat.  
REGO – The Renewable Energy Guarentees  of Origin scheme is administered by Ofgem and gives  
transparency to consumers about the proportion of electricity that suppliers source from renewable generation.  
Retrofit  – modifications to existing buildings to improve its energy efficiency and/or decre ase energy 
demand.  
SAP – Standard Assessment Procedure (SAP) is the methodology used by the Government to assess 
and compare the energy and environmental performance of dwellings. Its purpose is to provide accurate and reliable assessments of dwelling energy performances that are needed to underpin 
energy and environmental policy initiatives.  
SuDs  - Sustainable drainage systems (SuDS) are drainage solutions that provide an alternative to the 
direct channelling of surface water through networks of pipes and sewers to nearby watercourses. 
By mimicking natural drainage regimes, SuDS aim to reduce surface water flooding, improve water quality and enhance the amenity and biodiversity value of the environment. SuDS achieve this by 35 
 lowering flow rates, increasing w ater storage capacity and reducing the transport of pollution to the 
water environment.  
ULEVs  - a low emission car or van that emits 75g/km CO2 or less, based on the NEDC test. ULEVs 
include pure electric vehicles, electric range -extender vehicles, and plu g-in hybrids (PHEVs).  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 36 
 Appendix 2 – Local Plan Policies Summary  
Policy number 
and name  Policy detail  
Policy DM1  
Habitat 
protection 
and improving 
biodiversity  This policy sets out that all development should, where possible, seek to deliver 
net biodiversity gain in addition to protecting existing habitat and species. 
Development proposals should seek to integrate biodiversity through their 
design and layout and provide connections between physical and functional 
netw orks.  Development proposals must seek to avoid harm to, protect and 
enhance natural habitats, areas and corridors for biodiversity. Development will 
not be permitted where significant impacts upon areas of international 
designation (including sites design ated as Special Areas of Conservation or 
Special Protection Areas and Ramsar sites) or national designation (including 
Sites of Special Scientific Interest) cannot be avoided, mitigated or as a last 
resort compensated. Developments that are likely to have an adverse impact, 
either alone or in combination, on internationally designated sites must satisfy 
the requirements of the Habitats Regulations, determining site specific impacts 
and avoiding or mitigating against impacts where identified.  
 
The creation o f new corridors for biodiversity will be supported in appropriate 
locations. The provision of buffers to protect sensitive habitats including those 
of wetlands and ponds will be required where necessary.  In exceptional 
circumstances where the negative imp acts of development on natural habitat 
and biodiversity are unavoidable, the negative impacts must be proportionately 
addressed in accordance with the hierarchy of:  
(i) mitigation;  
(ii) compensation in the form of habitat; and finally  
(iii) offsetting with in the locality.  
 
The loss, deterioration or fragmentation of irreplaceable habitats, such as 
Veteran trees and Ancient Woodland, will not be permitted unless the need for, 
and benefits of, the development in that location can be demonstrated to clearly 
outweigh the loss. Ecological impacts of a proposed development will need to be 
quantified by using the Biodiversity Impact Assessment Calculator (BIAC) where 
appropriate and development proposals must demonstrate a net gain in 
ecological units.  
Policy DM2  
Epping Forest 
SAC and the 
Lee Valley SPA  This policy sets out that the Council will expect all relevant development proposals 
to assist in the conservation and enhancement of the biodiversity, character, 
appearance and landscape setting of the Epping Fore st Special Area of 
Conservation (SAC) and the Lee Valley Special Protection Area (SPA).  It includes 
specific reference to the strategic approach that the Council has taken through 
the development and adoption of:  
• an Air Pollution Mitigation Strategy,  
• an Approach to managing recreational pressure on the Epping Forest SAC 
(SAMM Strategy  
• a Green and Blue Infrastructure Strategy.  
It then provides details of the requirements in relation to individual development 
proposals to secure the implementation of these strategies in order to ensure that 
there will be no harm to the integrity of the protected sites.  
 37 
 Policy DM4  
Green belt  This policy sets out the five purposes of the Green Belt, the approach to the 
determination of applications fo r development in the green belt in relation to 
very special circumstances and the consideration of openness.  It also identifies 
development that is not considered to be or  has the potential to not be 
considered to be, inappropriate development in the Gree n Belt or may be 
considered.  
Policy DM5  
Green and 
blue 
infrastructure  This policy requires development proposals to demonstrate that they have been 
designed to retain and enhance the Districts Green and Blue Infrastructure. In 
addition,  proposals for Gree n and Blue Infrastructure need to be appropriate 
and adequate, taking into account the nature and scale of the development, its 
setting, context and intended use. In the Garden Communities a full concept 
plan of proposed green and blue infrastructure that incorporates existing 
features on the site and its links to the wider landscape and townscape will be 
required for submission with the application along with any requirements set 
out in the Strategic Masterplans.  It also makes clear that provisions  for 
enhanced connectivity and integration to existing Green Infrastructure should 
not increase increased visitor pressure on the Epping Forest SAC.  
Policy DM9  
High quality 
design  This policy sets out the Council’s requirement that all new development must 
achie ve a high specification of design and contribute to the distinctive character 
and amenity of the local area.  The Council will require all development 
proposals to be design -led, use sustainable design and construction principles 
that consider adaptation a nd mitigation approaches to address climate change 
and minimise vulnerability to climate change impacts and which will not 
exacerbate vulnerability in other areas. It also includes the Council’s required 
approach to achieving high quality design within the  Strategic Masterplan Areas, 
design standards, landscaping, the Public Realm, Connectivity and Permeability 
(development proposals must maximise connectivity within, and through, the 
development and to the surrounding areas including the provision of high 
quality and safe pedestrian and cycle routes) and privacy and amenity (including 
needing to address issues of vibration, noise, fumes, odour, light pollution, air 
quality and microclimatic conditions).  
Policy DM10  
Housing 
design and 
quality  This policy sets out the Council’s requirements that development should meet or 
exceed the minimum internal space standards set out in National Prescribed 
Space Standards and open space standards.  Where appropriate development 
proposals should seek to include enhanced provision of green infrastructure, 
including the quantity and quality of landscaped areas, tree provision and the 
provision of additional open space.  
Policy DM11  
Waste 
recycling 
facilities in 
new 
developments  This policy sets out that all development which generates waste will be required 
to make on site provision for general waste, the separation of recyclable materials 
and organic material for composting. In addition,  on-site provision must ensure 
adequate dedic ated internal and external storage space to manage the volume of 
waste arising from the site.  
  
Policy DM12  
Subterranean, 
basement 
development 
and lightwells  This policy sets out the approach the Council will take when considering 
proposals for subterranean developments, basements, or extensions to existing 
basements. This includes the consideration of local geological conditions.  In 
determining proposals for basements and other underground development the 
Council will require an assessment of t he scheme’s impact on drainage, flooding, 
groundwater conditions and structural stability in the form of a Basement 
Impact Assessment and where appropriate a Basement Construction 
Management Statement.  38 
 Policy DM15  
Managing and 
reducing flood 
risk This pol icy sets out the approach that the Council will take in relation to 
managing and reducing flood risk. The Council will require all development 
proposals to demonstrate that they avoid and reduce the risk of all forms of 
flooding to future occupants and do not increase the risk of flooding elsewhere.  
Local Plan allocations are directed towards Flood Zone 1 or to areas with the 
lowest probability of flooding. Any proposals for new development (except 
water compatible uses) within Flood Zone 2 and 3a will be required to provide 
sufficient evidence for the Council to assess whether the requirements of the 
Sequential Test and Exception Test, have been satisfied.  It identifies when a 
development proposal will be required to be supported by a site -specific  Flood 
Risk Assessment (FRA) which should take account of all potential sources of 
flooding and climate change allowances and the matters that should be 
addressed within it.  All proposals for new development will be required to 
manage and reduce surface water ru n-off, manage water and waste water 
discharges, ensure safe access and egress for future users of the development 
and an emergency evacuation plan where appropriate include measures to 
assist existing communities at risk of flooding where feasible.  All proposals for 
development within a Critical Drainage Area or a Flood Risk Assessment Zone 
will be required to provide a site-specific  flood risk assessment.  
Policy DM16  
Sustainable 
drainage 
systems This policy sets out that all proposals for new developmen t must seek to manage 
surface water as close to its source as possible in line with the drainage 
hierarchy set out in the policy.  The Council will require Sustainable Drainage 
Systems (SuDS) to be incorporated into new development by way of site layout 
and design and sets out the requirements for reducing surface water flows in 
major and non -major developments on greenfield and brownfield sites.  The 
policy also sets out the requirements for SuDS including that they are designed 
to maximise biodiversity an d local amenity benefits and where appropriate, 
ensure that they provide for clean and safe water at the surface and improve 
water quality.  
Policy DM17  
Protecting and 
enhancing 
water courses 
and flood 
defences  This policy sets out the distances that new development must be set back from 
main rivers and ordinary watercourses in order to provide a naturalised and 
undeveloped buffer zone. Buffer zones should be designed for the benefit of 
biodiversity and should be undisturbed by lighting. It also identifies  when 
environmental enhancements should be investigated and secured.  In addition , 
proposals must not adversely affect the natural functioning of main rivers and 
ordinary watercourses, including through culverting and development on or 
adjacent to a waterc ourse must not result in the deterioration of the water 
quality of that watercourse or impact on the stability of the banks of a 
watercourse or river.  
Policy DM18  
On site 
management 
and reuse of 
wastewater 
and water 
supply  This sets out the approach the C ouncil will take to ensure that there is adequate 
surface water, foul drainage and treatment capacity to serve a proposed 
development, demonstrate that it does not impact on existing development and 
ensure the separation of surface and foul water systems.  The Council will expect 
new development to connect to mains foul drainage and  will restrict the use of 
non-mains drainage for foul water disposal, particularly in Groundwater Source 
Protection Zones. In addition,  all proposals for new development will be 
required to ensure that there is adequate water supply infrastructure capacity 
both on and off site to serve the development with sufficient quality and 
quantity, flow rate and pressure of water, without impacting on existing users.  
It also requires the i nstallation and management of measures for the efficient 39 
 use of mains water and where possible with direct connection to the mains 
public water supply.  
Policy DM19  
Sustainable 
water use  This policy sets out the requirement to incorporate water saving measures and 
equipment in all new development and the water efficiency standards to be met.  
 
Policy DM20  
Low carbon 
and 
renewable 
energy  This policy encourages the incorporation of low carbon and renewable energy 
measures in new and existing development.  Low carbon and renewable energy 
technologies will be permitted provided that they do not have any adverse impact 
on the integrity of any European sites, wildlife sites, protected species or habitats 
or the openness of the Green Belt. A positive assessment has to be provided as 
part of any application demonstrating how any impacts on the environment and 
heritage assets, including cumulative landscape, noise, visual, air quality and 
emissions, and traffic generation impacts can be avoided or mitigated through 
careful consideration of location, scale and design.  The use of combined heat and 
power (CHP), and/or combined cooling, heat and power (CCHP) and district 
heating will be encouraged in new developments.  Bio -mass based CHP proposals 
are required to demonstrate that they would not have an adverse effect on the 
integrity of the Epping Forest SAC.  Strategic Masterplans will be required to 
demonstrate how the potential to incorporate infrastructure for district heating 
can be provided.  
Policy DM21  
Local 
environmental 
impacts, 
pollution and 
land 
contamination  This policy sets out that the Council will require that the residual local 
environme ntal impacts of all development proposals after mitigation do not lead 
to unacceptable impacts on the health, safety, wellbeing and amenity of existing 
and new users or occupiers of a development site, or the surrounding land. These 
potential impacts can include, but are not limited to, air and water (surface and 
groundwater) pollution, dust, noise, vibration, light pollution, odours, and fumes 
as well as land contamination. The Council will resist development which, 
amongst other things, leads to unaccepta ble local environmental impacts, 
including, but not limited to, air pollution, noise and vibration, light pollution, 
odours, dust and land and water contamination.  It requires that activities likely 
to generate pollution are located away from sensitive us es and receptors where 
possible, practical and economically feasible.  Development proposals must 
mitigate and reduce to a minimum any adverse local environmental impacts and 
activities that may have wider cumulative effects.  
Policy DM22 
Air quality  This policy sets out that the Council will seek to ensure that the District is 
protected from the impacts of air pollution. Potential air pollution risks will need 
to be properly considered and adequate mitigation included in the design of 
new development to en sure that neither future, nor existing residents, workers, 
visitors, nor environmental receptors are adversely affected.  As well as 
managing the impacts of air pollution on human health it also specifically 
addresses the need to demonstrate that developme nt will have no adverse 
effect on the integrity of the Epping Forest SAC as a result of the development 
and the strategic approach that the Council has taken through the adoption of 
an Air Pollution Mitigation Strategy.  
Policy T1  
Sustainable 
Transport 
Choices  This policy sets out the approach that the Council will take to promote a safe, 
efficient and convenient transport system.  Of particular relevance to this 
Assessment is that the Council will:  
• promote transport choice, thro ugh improvements to public transport 
services and supporting infrastructure, and providing coherent and direct cycling 40 
  
 
 
 and walking networks to provide a genuine alternative to the car and facilitate a 
modal shift; and  
• provide opportunities to improve acc ess to the two town and four 
district centres and rail stations by all modes of transport and ensure good 
integration between transport modes;  
 
It sets out that development should minimise the need to travel, promote 
opportunities for sustainable transport  modes, improve accessibility to services 
and support the transition to a low carbon future.  Development proposals that 
generate significant amounts of movement will normally be required to provide 
a Travel Plan and those developments which generate a sig nificant number of 
heavy goods vehicle movements will be required to submit a Routing 
Management Plan.  Reduced car parking, including car free, development in 
sustainable locations will be supported and in order to accommodate the use of 
low emission vehi cles to support improvements in air quality within the District 
the provision of electric vehicle charging points will be required within all new 
developments which make provision for car parking for vehicles.  
Policy T2  
Safeguarding 
of routes and 
faciliti es This policy seeks to protect any land required for proposed transport schemes 
and local facilities.   