 
1 
 
Fife Resource Solutions  
 
6th February 2020 
 
Climate Fife: Sustainable Energy and 
Climate Action Plan (2020-2030) 
 
 
  
  
One of Fife Council’s 2 hydrogen hybrid RCVs top left. Image courtesy of Bright Green Hydrogen,  
 
 
 
2 
   
Prepared by Fife Resource Solutions on behalf of Fife Council 
Authors Catherine Payne, Hayley Williamson, Hugh Muschamp and 
Janet Mackenzie. 
Reviewers Keith Winter, Ken Gourlay, Ross Spalding, Robin Baird 
Document status Final - approved by Committee for public release 
Date of issue 06/02/20 
In the view of Fife Council (please tick appropriate box): 
 The policy, plan or strategy (PPS) falls under the scope of 
Section 5(3) of the Act and requires a Strategic Environmental 
Assessment (SEA) under the Environmental Assessment 
(Scotland) Act 2005 or 
The PPS falls under the scope of Section 5(4) of the Act and 
requires an SEA under the Environmental Assessment 
(Scotland) Act 2005 or 
The PPS does not require an SEA under the Environmental 
Assessment (Scotland) Act 2005. However, Fife Council wish to 
carry out an SEA on a voluntary basis. They accept that, as this 
SEA is voluntary, the statutory 5 week timescale for views from 
the Consultation Authorities cannot be guaranteed. 
 
Resource Efficient Solutions,   
Bankhead Central (1st floor),  
Bankhead Park, 
Glenrothes     
KY7 6GH 
 
 
 
This report has been prepared by Resource Efficient Solutions with all reasonable skill and care, within the terms of the Contract with Fife 
Council (“the Client”). No part of this document may be reproduced or altered without the prior written approval of Resource Efficient 
Solutions. 
  
3 
 Table of Contents 
 
Table of Contents ...............................................................................................................3  
Introduction ........................................................................................................................5  
The Climate Emergency .............................................................................................5  
Fife’s response to the climate emergency ...................................................................7  
Get involved – your climate needs you .......................................................................8  
Strategy ..............................................................................................................................9  
Vision ..........................................................................................................................9  
Climate friendly .............................................................................................9  
Climate ready ...............................................................................................9  
Climate just ................................................................................................. 10  
Themes / Programmes of work ................................................................................. 11  
Innovation and co-ordination ...................................................................... 12  
Energy efficiency ........................................................................................ 12  
Low carbon energy ..................................................................................... 13  
Move, store and transform energy .............................................................. 13  
Sustainable travel ....................................................................................... 14  
Resource efficiency .................................................................................... 14  
Carbon sequestration ................................................................................. 15  
Adaptation .................................................................................................. 15  
Co-benefits................................................................................................................ 16  
Achieving local objectives ........................................................................... 16  
Economic benefits ...................................................................................... 16  
Social benefits ............................................................................................ 16  
Other benefits ............................................................................................. 17  
International, national and local climate change commitments ................................. 17  
Local Commitment ...................................................................................... 17  
National legislation...................................................................................... 18  
The Covenant of Mayors for Climate and Energy ....................................... 20  
Implementation ......................................................................................................... 21  
Delivery model ............................................................................................ 21  
Emergency action plan and actions for the first 100 days ........................... 21  
Organisational structure .............................................................................. 22   
4 
 Partnership working .................................................................................... 22  
Staff capacity allocated ............................................................................... 23  
Delivering transformational change in a short timescale ............................. 23  
Monitoring and evaluation ........................................................................... 25  
Risk and Vulnerability Assessment (RVA) ....................................................................... 26  
Baseline Emission Inventory (BEI) ................................................................................... 27  
Baseline emissions inventory (BEI) 1990 ................................................... 27  
Monitoring emissions inventory (MEI) 2017 ................................................ 28  
Recent trends in greenhouse gas emissions in Fife ................................... 28  
Emissions reduction target ......................................................................... 29  
Meeting the target ....................................................................................... 29  
External factors which may impact progress against targets ...................... 29  
Action Plans ..................................................................................................................... 30  
Appendix A Climate Fife Action Plan, 12 Months to March 2021 ..................................... 31  
Appendix B Climate Fife mitigation and adaptation action plan (2021-2030) ................... 33  
  
5 
 Introduction  
The Climate Emergency 
Over the last decade Fife Council has worked 
proactively to reduce the emission of 
greenhouse gases which contribute to climate 
change, and Fife’s carbon footprint has fallen by 
over 55% (compared to 1990 emission levels). 
This activity has set a good foundation, but the 
latest climate science1 suggests that emissions 
need to be cut even deeper and faster than 
previously thought to avoid catastrophic 
impacts.  
Globally, climate change was overshadowed by other issues since the financial crisis; 
however, it was brought sharply back into focus in 2018 by the United Nations’ 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)2, which declared that climate change 
had become an emergency because of a collective failure to act. The IPCC warned that 
failing to limit global warming to a 1.5°C increase in global average temperatures over the 
preindustrial period would trigger runaway climate change and have catastrophic impacts 
on health, livelihoods, food security, water supply, human security and economic growth.  
The impact of climate change has largely, until 
this point, been masked by the fact that over 
half of the greenhouse gas emissions released 
by human activities have been absorbed by 
natural systems such as the oceans, soils and 
forests. The latest science3 suggests we are at 
a tipping point and that the planet’s natural 
abilities to absorb greenhouse gases appear to 
be at, or beyond their natural capacity. Earth 
has warmed to the point that natural sinks of 
greenhouse gases are now becoming active 
emitters of greenhouse gases and dangerous 
‘feedbacks’ such as forest fires and melting 
permafrost are now releasing vast natural 
stores of carbon into the atmosphere. For 
                                            
1 IPCC, 2018: Summary for Policymakers. In: Global Warming of 1.5°C. An IPCC Special Report on the impacts of global warming of 
1.5°C above pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas emission pathways, in the context of strengthening the global 
response to the threat of climate change, sustainable development, and efforts to eradicate poverty [Masson-Delmotte, V., P. Zhai, H.-O. 
Pörtner, D. Roberts, J. Skea, P.R. Shukla, A. Pirani, W. Moufouma-Okia, C. Péan, R. Pidcock, S. Connors, J.B.R. Matthews, Y. Chen, X. 
Zhou, M.I. Gomis, E. Lonnoy, T. Maycock, M. Tignor, and T. Waterfield (eds.)]. World Meteorological Organization, Geneva, Switzerland, 
32 pp. https://www.ipcc.ch/sr15/   
 
3 WMO Greenhouse Gas Bulletin, 2018 https://public.wmo.int/en/media/press-release/greenhouse-gas-concentrations-atmosphere-
reach-yet-another-high     
 
 In 2018 total annual global 
greenhouse gas emissions reached 
55 gigatonnes of CO2 equivalent. The 
world needs to cut emissions by 
7.6% every year  for the next 10 years 
and global annual emissions fall below 
25 gigatonnes of CO2e by 2030, if we 
are to have any chance of limiting 
warming to below 1.5°C.  
The UN’s assessment of the situation 
is blunt: "Countries collectively failed 
to stop the growth in global 
greenhouse gas emissions, meaning 
that deeper and faster cuts are now 
required… We need quick wins to 
reduce emissions as much as 
possible in 2020… We need to catch 
up on the years in which we 
procrastinated. If we don't do this, the 
1.5°C goal will be out of reach before 
2030." 
Inger Anderson, UNEP Executive 
Director  
6 
 example, the 2019-20 mega-fires4 in Australia have so far released as much carbon dioxide 
into the atmosphere as Australia’s entire carbon footprint (from human activities) from the 
previous year.  
If natural carbon sinks become emitters at a global scale, then these emissions would dwarf 
human greenhouse gases and render us powerless to stop full climate breakdown, where 
global temperatures spiral out of control - so called ‘runaway climate change’.  
The technologies and policy knowledge needed 
to avoid this catastrophe already exist, but 
transformations must begin now. The IPCC 
warns that we only have a limited period left to 
take the decisive action required to avert this 
crisis and avoid uncontrollable warming; and 
that emissions need to at least halve, and 
ideally fall as low as possible by 20305. 
However, despite nearly three decades of 
climate change negotiations, and international 
commitments such as the Kyoto Protocol and 
the Paris Agreement there is no sign of a 
slowdown, let alone a decline, in the concentration of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. 
Global greenhouse gas emissions continue to increase at a rate of 1.5% per year. 
It would be easy to see climate change as someone else’s problem given that the impacts 
are likely to be most severe in the developing world. But this would be unjust given that 
78% of global emissions come from the G20 and given that global emissions are driven by 
the consumption of the wealthiest countries (such as the UK). Rich countries have 
simultaneously failed to cut emissions quickly enough at home and have offshored many of 
their own polluting industries to the developing world. Taking urgent and significant action to 
cut greenhouse gas emissions is the responsibility of everyone, but most especially those 
countries which have benefitted for the longest from fossil fuel use and whose consumption 
is the primary driver of global emissions.  
Internationally it is recognised that the current 
level of ambition of climate change 
commitments needs to be increased, and 
rapidly translated into action for the sake of the 
future welfare of humanity. Commitments to cut 
emissions are meaningless without action. 
Mass protests around the world in the last year 
demonstrate the groundswell of desire for real 
action. This, alongside overwhelming scientific 
evidence and the increasingly extreme weather 
being witnessed globally, have prompted local 
and national governments to declare climate 
emergencies. The Scottish Government’s 
declaration of a climate emergency, followed by 
                                            
4 https://www.washingtonpost.com/weather/2020/01/24/australia-bush-fires-have-nearly-doubled-countrys-annual-greenhouse-gas-
emissions/  
5 https://www.technologyreview.com/s/614801/we-need-to-halve-emissions-by-2030-they-rose-iagain-i-in-2019/  Runaway warming can no longer be 
considered just a worst-case scenario. 
Continuing the current global emission 
trajectory will deliver warming of an 
estimated 3.2-6°C by the end of the 
century which would lead to much of 
the planet becoming uninhabitable. 
Business as usual makes runaway 
climate change the most likely 
outcome.  
Ten years ago, if countries had acted 
on climate change science, 
governments would have needed to 
reduce emissions by 3.3% each year. 
Today, we need to reduce emissions 
by 7.6% each year to limit warming to 
less than 1.5°C. By just 2025, if we fail 
to act, the cut needed will steepen to 
15.5% each year.  
Every day we delay, the more 
extreme, difficult and expensive the 
cuts become  
7 
 Fife Council on 26th September 2019, shows just how timely this plan is. The 2020s must be 
the decade of climate action.  
Fife’s response to the climate emergency 
It is recognised that Fife Council and the wider community have made considerable 
progress at reducing emissions and increasing resilience, but that we now need to mobilise 
to accelerate the pace and ambition of our response to the climate crisis. Climate Fife is 
Fife’s response to the climate emergency. 
This Sustainable Energy and Climate Action Plan: Climate Fife  sets out the next phase of a 
Fife-wide approach to tackling the climate emergency and considers the actions that need 
to be taken urgently to limit the its most harmful impacts. A sea-change is needed in terms 
of innovation, finance and governance and how business as usual is conducted within Fife 
Council and within Fife society more broadly. All aspects of day to day life will need to 
change from: 
 How we heat and power our homes; 
 Where and how we build; 
 Settlement patterns and how we move around; 
 Investment decisions and budget-setting; 
 The type of industry and businesses that will thrive; 
 Jobs and skills;  
 Consumption patterns and waste management; 
 What we eat; and 
 How we use land.  
Fife Council is aware of how challenging it will be to achieve the actions and targets within 
this plan; it would be an inadequate response to the climate emergency if they were not so. 
Every action taken makes a difference, and every instance of inaction will take us closer to 
a climate breakdown. Whilst the future may be radically different to the present and perhaps 
very different to how Fifers envisage the future today, if we act decisively and proactively 
now our actions could help to tackle not just climate change but many other social and 
economic problems.  
The plan sets out the strategy which underpins Climate Fife , presenting: 
 a vision for where Fife Council wants to be , and the themes and programmes to 
show where actions are needed and how this will be supported;  
 where Fife is now , with a Baseline Emission Inventory for Greenhouse Gas 
Emissions, and a Risk and Vulnerability Assessment to show the known and 
expected risks from unavoidable climate change; and  
 action plans showing how Fife will get to where we want to be,  working in 
partnership to deliver a robust response to climate change and identifying the first 
critical steps and plans to take.  
Climate Fife is a Fife-wide plan; however, at this stage Climate Fife’s action plan largely 
comprises actions being driven by Fife Council and key public sector partners. While the 
Council’s direct footprint only represents 3% of Fife’s total carbon footprint, through our 
policies, projects and service delivery it has an influence over upwards of 40% of Fife’s total 
carbon footprint. As a Local Authority, Fife Council is termed a major player  under the 
Climate Change (Scotland) Act; and as such Fife Council wants to offer leadership within 
the wider region.   
8 
 Fife Council’s influence on Fife-wide emissions is multi-faceted, and both direct and indirect. 
For example:  
 Fife Council is a major employer in Fife. After the NHS, the Council is the largest 
employer in the region.  
 Fife Council is a large energy and fuel consumer and Council procurement could be 
a considerable force for good in terms of developing the low carbon economy within 
Fife if environmental considerations drive purchasing decisions.  
 The Council operates a large property and land portfolio within Fife which comprises 
thousands of properties from leisure centres, offices, commercial and industrial units, 
schools, landfill sites, parks, woodlands, and care homes to social housing units.  
 In conjunction with community planning partners, the Council also sets planning, 
transport, waste and housing policy and makes strategic decisions about where and 
how Fife should be developed in the future, and how environmental risks such as 
flooding are managed. These decisions will shape Fife’s future resilience to the 
projected impacts of climate change and Fife’s future emissions trajectory.  
Get involved – your climate needs you 
Climate change is not a problem that can be solved by government alone – everyone needs 
to act to cut emissions and adapt to the physical impacts of the changing climate. Climate 
Fife is for everyone in Fife. It is an evidence-based, living plan that will evolve as Fife 
responds to climate change and as the full dimensions of climate change become clear.  
It is recognised that more actions are needed in the action plan to make Fife as resilient as 
possible to extreme weather events and to achieve full decarbonisation. The intention is 
that the action plan will grow to include more projects as more partners become involved in 
Climate Fife.  
Suggestions for new actions are welcomed and should be submitted to: 
https://climatechange.fife.scot/climate-fife/ 
9 
 Strategy  
Vision 
Climate Fife’s vision has been developed in partnership with local stakeholders and is 
underpinned by three core principles: 
 
Climate friendly  
Climate-friendly refers to activities which cut carbon emissions i.e. climate change 
mitigation. Scotland is decarbonising its society and economy so that our way of life does 
not jeopardise the stability of the climate or compromise the life chances of future 
generations or the living planet on which society depends. Becoming climate friendly will 
mean aligning Fife with the net zero carbon future set out in the Scottish Government’s 
targets for decarbonisation; which are world-leading in their ambition6.  
Fife has already met existing Government targets for lowering its carbon emissions by 42% 
by 2020. It is Fife Council’s ambition to work with local and national partners to achieve the 
latest climate change targets, requiring Fife to achieve a net zero emissions target by 2045. 
Meaning that Fife’s contribution to climate change will end within a generation. The 
amendments also require Scotland to become effectively carbon neutral by 20457. Fife 
Council recognises that the science in this area is advancing rapidly and that the window for 
action to avoid catastrophic climate change is small and that the recommended dates for 
achieving decarbonisation in Scotland may change. Climate Fife will be guided by national 
policy in this area. 
Climate ready 
Climate ready refers to increasing resilience to the impacts of climate change – being 
climate ready is also called climate change adaptation. Climate Fife  recognises that our 
society and infrastructure is designed for a historic climate that no longer exists, and that 
                                            
6 https://www.gov.scot/policies/climate-change/  
7 The terms carbon neutral and net-zero are often used interchangeably but there are differences. The term net-zero 
includes a wider basket of greenhouse gases (not just CO2 and methane) but also nitrous oxide, which is emitted during 
agricultural and industrial activities as well as from the combustion of fossil fuels. Simply being carbon neutral would not 
stop global warming because these other gases are also harmful to the atmosphere. Perhaps an even better term would 
be "climate neutral". Net-zero is the point where the same volume of all greenhouse gases is being emitted as is being 
absorbed through offsetting techniques like forestry . 
 By 2045 Fife will be:  
climate friendly , having transformed the economy, infrastructure, land use 
and energy system to decarbonise how we live;  
climate ready , with plans and projects to increase the resilience of Fife 
communities and the economy to help minimise the impacts from unavoidable 
climate change; and  
climate just , ensuring that all Fifers and the Fife environment can benefit 
from this transition.  
 
 
 
 
10 
 considerable adaptation will be needed to ensure resilience in the future. In addition, even if 
all greenhouse gas emissions stopped tomorrow, thermal inertia within the climate system 
means it takes between 10-40 years for greenhouse gas emissions to affect the climate, 
therefore considerable disruption is now inevitable from these past emissions. With over 
half of the industrial greenhouse gas emissions ever emitted having been released since 
19888; it is sobering to realise that the impact of over half of humanity’s emissions has yet 
to be fully felt and will be considerable. The stable climate that society and the economy is 
based on can no longer be assumed, so society must adapt infrastructure and our way of 
life to cope with the changed climate. 
Fife Council is committed to making its region as resilient as possible to the physical 
impacts of climate change such as flooding and sea-level rise, so that its people, 
environment, assets and livelihoods can thrive despite climate disruption. With a coastline 
on three sides, climate change adaptation is a priority for Fife.  
Community resilience is often thought of in terms of the ability to withstand and prepare for 
short term shocks. However, resilience in communities isn’t just about ‘emergencies’, it’s 
also about longer-term challenges or stresses. These longer-term challenges often have the 
greatest impact on the ability of communities to be resilient, including their ability to respond 
to emergency events. Therefore, Climate Fife  will focus on hard adaptation (i.e. how Fife 
can adapt the built environment through technical solutions) and also build soft adaptation 
skills amongst the community to build the social skills and networks that will increase 
resilience and minimise structural barriers to adaptation.  
Making Fife climate ready will be a considerable challenge because global progress at 
cutting greenhouse gas emissions has been so slow. The longer it takes the world to 
decarbonise, the worse the damage to the climate will be and the more difficult it will be for 
society to adapt.  
Climate just  
Fife, like many parts of the world, suffers from social and economic inequalities. Some 
areas are thriving but there are other areas of Fife where there are real challenges9. 
Climate Fife  sets out actions that will positively impact upon the lives of everyone in Fife, 
regardless of their background. The plan aims to transform Fife in the light of climate 
change to make Fife a resilient, fair and prosperous place to live and work, and puts 
fairness and social justice at the heart of achieving climate goals. To be successful all Fifers 
need to benefit from the transition to a decarbonised economy and no sections of the 
population can be left behind.  
Fife Council acknowledge that responding to the climate emergency is not the most 
common subject that residents raise with Council staff and politicians - however acting on 
climate change is aligned with achieving the social and economic goals within Fife’s 
Community Plan - Plan4Fife - and will be essential in reducing inequalities and achieving 
social justice. The fact that climate change may not be foremost in the concerns of Fifers 
does not alter its fundamental significance. Existing demographic and socioeconomic 
challenges are likely to be exacerbated by a changing climate, and it is likely that those who 
are least responsible for climate change will be most impacted. Furthermore, the most 
                                            
8 More than half of all industrial carbon dioxide emissions have been released since 1988, which is a hallmark year for 
another reason: it was the year when the evidence and risks of human-caused warming first became widely known: 
http://ucsusa.org/morethanhalf  
9 A plan for Fife (2017-27), 2017  
11 
 vulnerable in society will be the least able to adapt to changing weather patterns or respond 
to extreme events like flooding and will need greater assistance if they are to thrive despite 
climate change. Many of those at the front line of climate risks have the least capacity to 
respond whether that is because of economic disadvantage, health concerns or other 
barriers. Fife Council recognises that it will not be possible to achieve any social and 
economic objectives, as set out in the Plan4Fife, without addressing climate justice. 
Climate justice is not only about preventing disproportionate impacts to historically 
marginalized groups, but also about ensuring that everyone shares in the health, economic, 
and social benefits of a clean energy economy. The projects within the action plan which 
will underpin Climate Fife  have been designed in recognition of these inequalities to ensure 
that responding to climate change does not widen existing social divisions, nor exclude any 
segments of society. 
Themes / Programmes of work 
Underneath the climate friendly, climate ready and climate just vision, there are three core 
areas of climate action, all of which must be undertaken if runaway warming is to be 
avoided:  
 Cutting emissions / decarbonisation – this is called climate change mitigation ; 
 Adapting to the physical changes of climate change – climate change adaptation ; 
and 
 Actively removing greenhouse gas emissions from the atmosphere (such as by tree-
planting or direct capture of flue gases) – carbon sequestration . 
Fife recognises that to avoid catastrophic climate change greenhouse gas emissions must 
fall as quickly as possible through a programme of mitigation to deliver net zero by 2045 or 
earlier if possible, and that this programme of mitigation needs to be bolstered by significant 
works to absorb greenhouse gases from the atmosphere (sequestration) as rapidly as 
possible. In terms of the climate emergency the priority has to be on rapid decarbonisation 
and sequestration because this is what is essential to avoid triggering runaway warming. 
Fife also recognises that adaptation is needed to cope with today’s extremes and will need 
to be carried out for centuries to come because of the impacts of historic emissions and the 
time lags in how the atmosphere processes greenhouse gases which mean that climate 
change will continue for many decades after emissions have stopped.  
Climate Fife will be implemented through eight themes; each of which will have a dedicated 
programme of work. These themes have been developed using the principles of the energy 
hierarchy where the approach seeks to reduce the amount of energy used in the first place 
and to move and store it in the most efficient manner, before employing technologies to 
reduce the carbon emissions associated with that energy generation.  
These eight strategic themes will combine to form a single integrated plan for Fife as 
illustrated:  
12 
  
More information on these themes is given below: 
Innovation and co-ordination 
Business as usual is one of the biggest barriers to robust action to tackle 
climate change. Responding to the climate crisis will require a total 
transformation of how people live their lives; business as usual solutions are not 
going to be enough. To achieve massive innovation across all aspects of 
society and infrastructure in the next decade will not be an easy task, and will 
necessitate considerable financial innovation, hand-holding, partnership building, guidance 
and coordination. Under the innovation and coordination programme, Climate Fife has 
grouped together projects that will encourage innovative solutions and partnerships. This is 
a cross-cutting theme and encompasses a wide variety of projects. To facilitate these 
projects Fife Council will act in a coordinating role, bringing disparate stakeholders together  
Energy efficiency 
Energy efficiency is one of the most cost-effective ways of reducing costs and 
carbon emissions simultaneously. Typical energy efficiency measures include 
retrofitting properties with better insulation, installing more efficient space and 
water heating systems, controls and energy management systems. Climate Fife 
projects will increase the energy efficiency of Fife’s buildings, assets and 
infrastructure to reduce energy consumption, associated carbon emissions and energy bills. 
Projects will improve the performance of building fabric and reduce the energy used by 
appliances and fittings. Building fabric projects will improve building energy performance by 
increasing insulation levels and improving glazing standards. Projects targeting energy 
using appliances and fittings will focus on super-efficient lighting technologies and other 
energy efficient technologies.  
 
13 
 Whilst not glamorous or innovative like many low carbon technologies, or futuristic like a 
hybrid vehicle, energy efficiency is likely to be the single most important workstream in 
helping Fife to tackle climate change. The Scottish Government has designated energy 
efficiency as a National Infrastructure Priority, the cornerstone of which is Energy Efficient 
Scotland Programme (a 15 to 20-year programme to transform the energy efficiency and 
heating of Scotland’s buildings so that, wherever technically feasible, and practical, 
buildings are near zero carbon by 2035). Given that the replacement rate for Fife’s buildings 
is less than 1% a year, and that older properties tend to be leaky, draughty, costly to heat 
and inefficient – the challenge to decarbonise Fife’s existing building stock in the next 15 
years is considerable.  
Low carbon energy 
Under the low carbon energy programme, Climate Fife projects seek to 
decarbonise the heat and power generated and used in Fife. Generating 
energy locally will create jobs and support the local economy. 
Generating more electricity locally via biomass, wind, wave, hydro and solar 
power, will reduce transmission and distribution losses compared to the current 
generation and transmission system. Generating heat locally will allow Fife to make the best 
use of local resources whether that be heat from biomass, (including wood, energy crops 
and agricultural waste products); heat from air-source, water-source and ground-source 
heat pumps or using waste heat from industrial processes.  
Scotland has made considerable progress in decarbonising its electricity supply and is 
aiming that by 2020 11% of Scotland’s heat demand and 100% of Scotland’s electricity 
demand equivalent will be produced from low carbon sources. The Scottish Government is 
aiming to decarbonise 100% of Scotland’s heat demand by 2050 under current targets, and 
for a 14% share of transport fuels to be renewable by 2030 under current targets.  
Move, store and transform energy 
Decarbonisation is a massive challenge, and the Scottish Government is 
advocating the use of a whole energy system approach to solving the challenge 
of decarbonising Scotland’s economy. A whole energy system approach means 
developing a portfolio of options for clean energy in all its various uses 
(electricity, heating and transport), and crucially by fitting them together in the 
best combinations to deliver energy security and value for business and consumers. Under 
the move, store and transform energy programme, Climate Fife projects will support an 
efficient ‘whole energy systems’ approach to moving, storing and transforming energy into 
different forms. A whole energy systems approach looks at minimising distribution, 
transmission and energy transformation losses by making smart choices about the most 
appropriate energy sources for a given time and location, and by joining networks and 
storage options together so that they work holistically.  
This programme of work will support the increased deployment of district heating and other 
heat networks, smart grids, energy storage systems (such as battery banks, heat stores, 
seasonal heat stores) and methods for transferring energy into the most useful forms for 
local needs. This could include using wind energy to convert seawater into hydrogen fuel 
for vehicles or using networks of electric vehicles to store excess energy generated during 
periods of peak generation (such as on windy days) that is surplus to current demand.  
District heating is a key element of this work programme and is a means to distribute the 
heat generated in a centralised energy centre, or heat generated as a by-product of 
 
14 
 industrial processes to a network of nearby residential or commercial users to meet their 
space and water heating needs. Smart grids which are electricity supply networks that use 
digital communications technology to detect and react to local changes in usage, will also 
have an important role to play.  
Sustainable travel  
Transport emissions have continued to rise in Scotland despite massive cuts in 
other sectors. Continuing with business as usual will not deliver the dramatic 
reductions needed in travel-related emissions. The idea that all that is required 
to decarbonise transport is to simply switch our existing petrol and diesel cars 
into electric versions and carry on as before is unsustainable. The House of 
Commons Science and Technology Committee says, “ the Government should not aim to 
achieve emissions reductions simply by replacing existing vehicles with lower-emissions 
versions …In the long-term, widespread personal vehicle ownership does not appear to be 
compatible with significant decarbonisation. ”10 Whilst increasing electric and hydrogen 
powered vehicles is a part of the solution, all ‘zero carbon’ strategies must acknowledge 
ways to actively encourage walking, cycling and improved low carbon public transport 
solutions. The rapid development of air transport and local airport strategies also need to be 
reconsidered as part of a low carbon transport strategy, including tackling the concept of 
‘frequent flying’, in an equitable manner.  
The Scottish Government is proposing to end the sale of new internal combustion engine 
cars from 2032. The Scottish Government is aiming for 14% of transport fuels to be 
renewable by 2030 under current targets. Under its latest work programme the Scottish 
Government has also committed to work to decarbonise public sector fleets by 2025 and to 
make all city centres free of vehicle emissions by 203011.  
Under the sustainable travel programme, Climate Fife projects will focus on decarbonising 
the Council’s own fleet, reducing the need to travel by settlement and development 
planning and smart technology; promoting active travel, increasing vehicle efficiencies, 
making public transport more popular and increasing the uptake of ULEV (ultra-low 
emission vehicles) such as hybrid-electric, full-electric and hydrogen fuel vehicles. 
Resource efficiency  
Under the resource efficiency programme, Climate Fife projects will help to 
deliver the circular economy by encouraging the most sustainable ways of 
managing, recovering and avoiding waste. Keeping materials in use and using 
resources efficiently will underpin this programme of work. Attention will also be 
paid to using water, food, land and other resources in the most efficient manner. 
The Scottish Zero Waste Plan sets the strategic direction for waste policy in Scotland and 
has a municipal recycling target of 70% by 2025. Fife’s own Zero Waste Fife – Resources 
Strategy and Action Plan  will also direct action in this area. 
 
 
                                            
10 https://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/science-and-technology-
committee/news-parliament-2017/clean-growth-report-published-17-19/   
11 https://www.gov.scot/publications/protecting-scotlands-future-governments-programme-scotland-2019-
20/pages/5/ 
 
15 
 Carbon sequestration 
Under the carbon sequestration programme, Climate Fife projects will focus on 
removing carbon dioxide from the atmosphere and storing it in long term carbon 
sinks so that it will not contribute to global warming in the medium term. The 
latest science suggests that it may not actually be possible to meet Fife 
Council’s climate change targets without massive carbon sequestration efforts 
because Fife has simply been too slow to cut emissions. This workstream will involve flue 
gas capture, reforestation projects, biochar12 projects and efforts to improve the health of 
delicate ecosystems such as peatlands which, if degraded, can become net emitters of 
greenhouse gases. Currently, around 12 million tonnes of carbon dioxide are absorbed by 
Scotland’s forests every year and increasing the size of the forests and woodlands will be 
essential if catastrophic climate change is to be avoided. Afforestation projects, especially 
those involving urban greening offer a wide range of benefits over and above carbon 
sequestration: cleaning air, reducing flood risk, and reducing the impact of climate change 
by providing shade and health benefits. The Scottish Government is committed to reversing 
the deforestation of Scotland and is committed to planting 10,000 hectares of new 
woodland every year to help absorb atmospheric carbon emissions.  
Adaptation 
Under the adaptation programme, Climate Fife projects will seek to increase 
Fife’s resilience to the changing climate (including today’s extremes) and 
adapting society, economy and infrastructure to cope with the new extremes 
that are projected. Adaptation means anticipating the adverse effects of 
climate change and taking appropriate action to prevent or minimise the 
damage they can cause or taking advantage of opportunities that may arise. It has been 
shown that well-planned, early adaptation action saves money and lives later13.  
Adaptation to climate change can be planned nationally but is mostly delivered locally and 
to be effective, actions must be tailored to local situations and local vulnerabilities. Local 
government, as the level of governance that is closest to individual community needs and 
geographic constraints, has a crucial role in delivering adaptation14. The Scottish 
Government has a national climate change adaptation programme – the Scottish Climate 
Change Adaptation Programme (SCCAP), and The Climate Change Scotland Act 
established Public Bodies Climate Change Duties, which require Councils to exercise their 
functions in a way best calculated to deliver any statutory adaptation programme15.  
The initial agreed actions which have been identified under these themes of work for 
the next decade are presented in the mitigation and (high level) adaptation plan in 
Appendix B of this report.  However, Climate Fife is a living document and additional 
actions and projects are welcomed. 
 
                                            
12 Biochar is a charcoal-like by-product of the wood processing industry which has significant carbon storage potential.  
13 Bertoldi, P. (editor), Guidebook ‘How to develop a Sustainable Energy and Climate Action Plan (SECAP) – Part 1 – the SECAP 
process, step by step towards low carbon and climate resilient cities by 2030, EUR 29412 EN, pp6  
14 https://www.climatexchange.org.uk/media/2392/adaptation_decision_making_at_the_local_level_-
_a_role_for_national_level_indicators.pdf   
15 https://www.legislation.gov.uk/asp/2009/12/part/4/crossheading/duties-of-public-bodies  
 
16 
 Co-benefits 
Achieving local objectives 
Whilst decarbonisation and building resilience are key drivers within Climate Fife it won’t 
just be the environment that benefits. Implementing Climate Fife will make it easier for Fife 
Council to achieve a wide range of objectives including social and economic priorities that 
will benefit everyone in Fife. Climate Fife has been designed with the four outcomes of 
Fife’s Community Plan16 (the Plan4Fife) in mind, 
which are:  
1. Opportunities for all 
2. Thriving places 
3. Inclusive growth and jobs 
4. Community led services 
Economic benefits 
Implementing Climate Fife will benefit Fife’s 
economy  by: 
 fostering market diversification to reduce 
economic risks;  
 the adoption of new technologies and the 
development of dirty green and circular 
economy businesses will lead to job creation that could reinvigorate communities 
who have been struggling economically since the loss of primary industries in the 
1970s and 1980s;  
 encouraging local agriculture, market gardening, forestry, biofuels and renewable 
energy supplies – as well as promoting the sharing economy means that in the future 
Fifers will spend more of their money in the local economy; 
 will provide the political commitment, leadership and long-term planning horizon 
necessary for local businesses to commit to a low emission future; 
 by increasing local food and energy security Fife businesses will be less vulnerable 
to supply chain shocks arising from climate change; and  
 by fostering resilience to a changing and uncertain future it is anticipated that 
disruption to business; and recovery times after any interruption can be minimised, 
and that, as a result Fife will be an attractive place to invest.  
Social benefits 
Implementing Climate Fife will benefit Fife’s society  by: 
 reducing inequalities and improving access to opportunities; 
 improving local amenities and quality of life; 
                                            
16 A Plan for Fife (2017-27) https://our.fife.scot/fife-plan/   Fife spends an estimated £445M* 
annually on gas, electricity, petrol and 
diesel. To date much of this 
expenditure goes straight out of the 
Fife economy to large multinational 
companies and does not benefit Fife 
business or communities. Climate Fife 
will look at opportunities to internalise 
some of this energy spend (by local 
energy generation and storage) to 
benefit the local economy and Fife 
communities.  
*Source: Burntisland Energy Masterplan (Fife Resource 
Solutions and Ramboll, 2017)   
17 
  improving health and wellbeing by improved air quality, more active lifestyles, and a 
healthier diet; 
 reducing Fife’s dependence on finite resources and diversifying the available energy 
mix will increase Fifers resilience to the global commodity price shocks that are 
predicted to become commonplace because of climate change; 
 promoting flexible working and strong ICT infrastructure to allow more people to work 
from home, reducing commuting and giving more space for family life – this will 
increase economic fairness by benefitting those who have, historically been 
disadvantaged by their caring responsibilities;  
 encouraging the rise of the sharing economy is another big social change that could 
transform commerce and materials use across Fife in the 2020s. This will help to 
reduce structural inequalities and social exclusion and will help make local 
communities more tightly-knit (which is an important component of resilience);  
 reducing reliance on private car ownership and the need to travel, will reduce the 
social exclusion currently faced by car-less households.  
Other benefits 
Many of the solutions presented in Climate Fife  will have considerable benefits for metrics 
such as quality of life, mental health, community cohesion and a sense of wellbeing. While 
these are hard to quantify their value should not be overlooked.  
 
International, national and local climate change commitments 
Climate Fife is undertaken within a framework 
of climate change legislation, policy and 
commitments, including: 
 The UN Sustainable Development 
Goals; 
 Scotland’s Climate Change 
Declaration; 
 National climate change legislation; 
and  
 The EU Covenant of Mayors for 
Climate and Energy. 
Local Commitment 
On the 27th February 2018, Fife Council 
Leaders re-signed the Scottish Climate 
Change Declaration. Along with the other 31 
Scottish Local Authorities, it commits Fife 
Council to recognise the anthropogenic 
origins of climate change, to deliver national 
climate change programmes, to share and 
promote best practice and to work with others 
in Fife to act on climate change mitigation and 
adaptation.  
 
18 
 On 26th September 2019, Fife Council acted further by declaring a Climate Emergency, 
stating: 
“Council agrees to declare a Climate Emergency for Fife and, as the only democratically 
elected body representing Fife alone, to provide leadership in working with others to 
address urgent challenges of climate change. Council recognises that what is needed are 
results not rhetoric and by merely expressing wants does not make them happen. 
Council further agrees to: 
1. Acknowledge the latest target set by the Scottish Parliament and to seek to reduce 
Fife’s carbon emissions by 75% compared with the baseline by 2030 reduce by 90% 
by 2040 and be carbon neutral by 2045;  
2. Continue to develop its Sustainable Energy and Climate Action Plan, which is 
currently under preparation for consultation and due to be submitted for final 
consideration by the Environment and Protective Services Committee in February 
2020; 
3. That the Plan should include a clear strategy and actions with realistic targets, to 
address climate change and achieve the overall target for reduction in carbon 
emissions, and should take account of the 12-point guidance on taking forward the 
climate change emergency agenda locally produced by the Association of Public 
Service Excellence;  
4. Taking account of the capacity and resources, both required and available to it, that 
the Council will incorporate the cost of climate change adaptation and mitigation 
within its budgetary decisions;  
5. To engage with its community planning partners to revise the Plan4Fife to include a 
clearer commitment and actions to address climate change;  
6. To assist communities to be more resilient to the impacts of global warming and 
climate change and work with partners and communities across Fife in pursuit of 
these targets.”  
National legislation 
Fife Council is committed to playing its part in achieving national climate change targets. 
The Scottish Government has set world leading targets for tackling climate change 
specifically for carbon emission reductions over the next 30 years and has just updated 
these targets17 in line with the latest scientific advice from the IPPC on the importance18 of 
keeping global average temperature rises below 1.5°C degrees above preindustrial levels19. 
Scotland has some of the most ambitious climate change targets in the world and the newly 
approved Climate Change (Emissions Reduction Targets) (Scotland) Act, 2019 which was 
enacted at the end of October 201920 commits Scotland to a new target of net-zero carbon 
emissions by 2045, and a 75% reduction in greenhouse gas emissions by 2030 (compared 
to a 1990 baseline). In doing so, Scotland will become one of the first countries in the world 
                                            
17 https://www.gov.scot/news/climate-change-action-1/  
18 https://www.ipcc.ch/sr15/   
19 https://www.theccc.org.uk/2019/05/02/phase-out-greenhouse-gas-emissions-by-2050-to-end-uk-contribution-to-global-warming/  
20 http://www.legislation.gov.uk/asp/2019/15/enacted    
19 
 to legislate to support the aims of the Paris Agreement which sets the standard for the 
international response to climate change. 
Progress is underpinned by the Scottish Climate Change Plan (2018), published in 2018 
which is the Scottish Government’s third report on proposals and policies (RPP3) for 
meeting its climate change targets. Alongside the Climate Change Plan, Scotland’s first 
Energy Strategy was published in 2017 and sets out the long-term vision for the future 
energy system in Scotland which has a strong focus on local energy systems and the 
adoption of a system wide approach. These updated targets are illustrated in the table 
below:  
Scottish Government Climate Change and Energy targets Year  
100% of Scotland’s electricity demand equivalent to be produced from renewables 2020 
56% reduction in greenhouse gas emissions (compared to 1990 baseline) 2020 
Delivery of national adaptation programme 202421  
75% reduction in greenhouse gas emissions (compared to 1990 baseline) 2030 
Phasing out of new petrol and diesel vehicle sales 2032 
The equivalent of 50% of the energy for Scotland’s heat, transport and electricity consumption to 
be supplied by renewable sources 2030 
An increase by 30% of the productivity of energy use across the Scottish economy 2030 
90% reduction in greenhouse gas emissions (compared to 1990 baseline) 2040 
No more than 5% of Scottish households in fuel poverty 2040 
Net carbon neutral 2040 
Net zero greenhouse gas emissions 2045 
As can be seen, Scotland’s national targets primarily relate to climate change mitigation. 
Adaptation is more difficult to monitor and evaluate than mitigation given its uncertainties, 
lack of a single clear metric, and the long-term horizons over which adaptation will need to 
be undertaken22. In terms of adaptation targets Fife Council is committed to achieving the 
outcomes and sub-outcomes of the Scottish Climate Change Adaptation Programme 
(SCCAP). The SCCAP represents the closest thing that there are to formal adaptation 
targets in Scotland.  
The draft Scottish climate change adaptation outcomes for the forthcoming adaptation 
programme period (2019-24), are illustrated below: 
                                            
21 And every five years thereafter  
22 https://www.lgiuscotland.org.uk/briefing/monitoring-and-evaluation-of-local-climate-change-adaptation/   
  
20 
 Scottish Government draft Adaptation Programme Outcomes23 
Outcome 1 Our communities are inclusive, empowered, resilient and safe in response to the 
changing climate 
Outcome 2 The people in Scotland who are most vulnerable to climate change are able to adapt 
and climate justice is embedded in climate change adaptation policy 
Outcome 3 Our inclusive and sustainable economy is flexible, adaptable and responsive to the 
changing climate 
Outcome 4 Our society's supporting systems are resilient to climate change 
Outcome 5 Our natural environment is valued, enjoyed, protected and enhanced and has 
increased resilience to climate change 
Outcome 6 Our coastal and marine environment is valued, enjoyed, protected and enhanced 
and has increased resilience to climate change 
Outcome 7 Our international networks are adaptable to climate change 
The Covenant of Mayors for Climate and Energy 
Recognising the significant challenge of mitigating and adapting to climate change, Fife 
Council signed the Covenant of Mayors for Climate and Energy24on the 27th February 2018.  
The new Covenant of Mayors for Climate & Energy tackles the issue by looking at 
interconnected challenges: climate change mitigation, adaptation and access to secure, 
sustainable and affordable energy for all. Signatories who signed up to the Covenant after 
2016 (such as Fife Council) commit to being bound by the EU’s 2030 climate change 
commitments which are: 
 Accelerating the decarbonisation of Fife by cutting CO 2 emissions (and possibly 
other greenhouse gases if desired) by at least 40% compared to a 1990 baseline by 
2030, thus contributing to keeping average global warming below 2°C25; 
 Strengthening Fife-wide capacity to adapt to unavoidable climate change impacts, 
thus making the Kingdom more resilient; 
 Increasing energy efficiency and the use of renewable energy sources within Fife, 
thus ensuring universal access to secure, sustainable and affordable energy services 
for all by 2030. 
In developing its Sustainable Energy and Climate Action Plan, Fife Council is proud to join 
over 9,000 local and regional authorities across 132 countries representing 800 million 
people, who are responding to the climate emergency. 
                                            
23 https://www.gov.scot/publications/climate-ready-scotland-scottish-climate-change-adaptation-programme-2019-2024-consultation-
draft/pages/9/   
24 http://www.covenantofmayors.eu/en/   
25 For Fife this target has already been achieved and has been superseded by the declaration (at a national and a local level) of a climate 
emergency and the onus is now on trying to keep average temperature rises below 1.5°C to reduce the risk of run-away climate change 
and to comply with requirements within the Climate Change (Emission Reduction Targets) (Scotland) Act to reduce emissions by 75% by 
2030.   
21 
 Implementation 
Delivery model 
This is the first Sustainable Energy and Climate Action Plan for Fife. Although it is being 
initiated by the Council, it will rely upon working in partnership with external organisations, 
businesses and the people of Fife to work. In particular, the Fife Environmental Partnership 
will play a key role in providing direction, co-ordination, advice and oversight of Climate Fife.  
Climate Fife will become a central repository where existing climate change mitigation and 
adaptation actions can be collated, and progress charted so that Fife’s advancement 
towards the goals can be understood more clearly. It will assess the carbon and adaption 
impacts of existing work and look to ensure links are made where gaps exist. This 
document sets out the initial action plan to support the implementation of Climate Fife. 
Emergency action plan and actions for the first 100 days 
The delivery model takes a holistic approach and seeks to use existing policies, plans and 
strategies through collaborative partnerships to ensure actions are delivered in the most 
effective way. Having said this, it is recognised that business as usual will not, on its own, 
deliver the urgent and decisive action that is needed to tackle the climate emergency. Time 
is of the essence in tackling climate change and the science suggests that the quicker we 
can make emissions reductions, the better – in terms of cost to implement measures and 
avoided costs from climate risks.  
Therefore, in addition to making best use of existing delivery routes a 12-month climate 
emergency action plan supported by a concerted communications campaign is needed to 
define the new paradigm, redefine business as usual and help deliver the dramatic 
behaviour change needed in the next decade. Within this 12-month emergency action plan 
(presented in Appendix A) actions have also been identified for the first 100 days, in line 
with APSE best practice guidance for responding the climate emergency26.  
The priority actions for the first 100 days of Climate Fife which will be launched by May 30th, 
2020 are: 
1. Establish a Climate Fife delivery group to support Council services to deliver robust 
action against climate change as part of their new Business as Usual; 
2. Fife Council will act as an exemplar for the rest of Fife and develop a Carbon 
Management Plan to set out a programme of carbon reduction measures for its own 
estate and activities. The draft Carbon Management plan will be revised to reflect the 
Climate Emergency and will be resubmitted to Fife Council Committee in April 2020, 
and actions within the plan to be progressed as a priority. 
3. Launch a cross-partner, Climate Change communications and behavioural change 
campaign within Fife: providing a single message usable by communities and 
organisations emphasising the urgency of action to address the climate emergency 
and increasing climate literacy so that everyone can play their part in reducing 
emissions and increasing resilience.  
 
                                            
26 https://www.apse.org.uk/apse/index.cfm/local-authority-energy-collaboration/apse-energy-views/2019/apse-energye28099s-12-points-
to-stimulate-thought-on-taking-the-climate-emergency-agenda-forward-locally/#   
22 
 Organisational structure 
Clear governance, well defined organisational structures and clear roles for all partners, will 
enable the success of Climate Fife. The organisational structure has been designed to best 
translate ambitions into reality, and to consolidate the knowledge of different organisations 
and individuals. Cross-cutting opportunities and partnerships will be undertaken at all levels 
of Climate Fife with the aim of integrating innovation into partners everyday processes.  
 
Partnership working 
At this stage Climate Fife’s action plan is made up of actions largely being driven by Fife 
Council and key public sector partners. The intention is that the action plan will grow as 
more partners become involved in Climate Fife. It is intended that stakeholders and citizens 
should be involved in all aspects of Climate Fife, and this is being fostered using: 
 Partnership working; 
 Engagement and consultation; and 
 Steering groups. 
Stakeholder engagement and statutory consultations have taken place at numerous points 
within the development of Climate Fife. The views of elected members, Fife Council 
officers, statutory consultees, community planning partners, business, the third sector, 
community groups, academia and the wider public have shaped the plan from:  
 the initial drawing board,  
 action Plan development; 
 conducting the RVA,  
 informing the SEA; and  
 
23 
  will be an essential element of its ongoing development through the creation, 
implementation and development of carbon emission reduction and climate change 
adaptation projects at the local level.  
A detailed communications plan is being developed to support Climate Fife and ensure that 
consultation is robust, inclusive and equitable.  
The Scottish Government has announced a nationwide programme of stakeholder 
engagement and community consultation around climate change beginning in the summer 
of 201927. Fife is committed to supporting and being a part of this Big Climate Conversation  
and ensuring that Fifers opinions shape the development of the climate change action 
plans. The communications plan which supports Climate Fife will ensure that strong links 
are made to the Big Climate Conversation  and that Fifers are encouraged to keep talking 
about climate change and their local priorities and concerns. While this document sets out 
the initial principles of Climate Fife, it will be local projects developed in partnership with Fife 
communities and other local stakeholders that will put flesh on the bones of Climate Fife 
and ultimately be responsible for delivering carbon savings and managing climate risks.  
Staff capacity allocated 
Fife Council, as signatory of the Covenant of Mayors, will fulfil the core senior management, 
programme manager and programme officer roles for Climate Fife. Fife Resource Solutions 
will support the Council in delivering the action plan by a Climate Fife Delivery Group. As 
Climate Fife develops, the partnership will expand and projects within the action plan will 
progress; it is therefore envisaged that other project partners will provide an increasing 
proportion of staff time in the future.  
Delivering transformational change in a short timescale 
If mankind is to avoid catastrophic runaway climate change our whole society and economy 
must be transformed and the time for action is short (less than 25 years). This means 
actions need to rapidly scale up and accelerate the process of decarbonisation that is 
currently underway. The conventional wisdom has been that decarbonising assets and 
infrastructure is easier to make the business case for if it is an iterative and incremental 
process with gradual changes building upon each other, until zero carbon status is 
achieved. However, the time remaining to make meaningful carbon emission reductions 
and build climate resilience is now so short, that this delivery model needs to be rethought. 
Numerous modest, incremental improvements to individual assets is unachievable within 
the time constraints of avoiding catastrophic warming and society must now seek to 
decarbonise and adapt in as few interventions as is possible.  
Why? Put simply it is a numbers game. For example, looking at Fife’s housing stock; to 
achieve zero greenhouse gas emissions by 2045, every existing dwelling in Fife would 
need to undergo the following major refurbishments between now and 2045 to make them 
climate-friendly and climate ready:  
                                            
27 https://www.gov.scot/news/the-big-climate-conversation/  
  
24 
  Significantly improve the energy efficiency of building fabric through increased 
insulation (including potentially over-cladding), and installing triple glazing and super 
insulated doors; 
 Significantly improve the energy efficiency of appliances and lighting within the home 
and smart metering to monitor emissions, (which may require rewiring);  
 Remove old fossil fuel heating systems and inefficient electric heating systems; 
 Incorporate low carbon electricity or heat generation into the building;  
 Connect to a low carbon energy network – like a local heat network for example and 
retrofit the heating output devices in the home to accommodate this (might need to 
resize radiators for example);  
 Install electric vehicle charging points nearby, and storage for multiple bicycles;  
 Increased capacity guttering, downpipes, water-butts and drainage to slow run-off;  
 Some homes may need more active flood protection measures such as air brick 
covers, non-return valves, flood resistant doors and windows etc; 
 More robust detailing that will be less susceptible to wind damage and rain ingress;  
 Install water efficient appliances and bathroom fittings to save water; 
 Passive solar shading, green-walls and green roofs to reduce overheating and storm 
damage and improve air quality; and 
 Increased permeable surfacing, rainwater storage and SUDS28 to reduce flood risk.  
Every home in Fife could be revisited multiple times to make these changes incrementally, 
but practically it is likely to need to combine some or all these interventions to achieve the 
2045 targets. In Fife there are already over 160,000 homes - the more stages it takes to 
achieve this work, the higher the number of properties that will need to be retrofitted every 
year, and Fife quickly enters the realms where this will not be physically possible to achieve 
in time. So, how many homes a year would need to undergo all these improvements 
to make every home in Fife climate friendly and climate ready by 2045?  
 
                                            
28 Sustainable Urban Drainage System  
 
25 
 Every year that targets for achieving climate friendly and climate ready refurbishments are 
missed, will increase the number of homes to be retrofitted in subsequent years. And these 
figures just consider Fife’s homes, there are thousands of other buildings and structures 
which will need to be refurbished to make them climate friendly and climate ready during 
the same period.  
The greater the number of stages involved in retrofitting Fife’s housing stock, the higher the 
overall cost will be and the greater complexity and potential wastefulness of resources if 
measures are upgraded multiple times before the end of their useful life. Delivering 
measures in combined packages of interventions will make savings in terms of staff time 
and other costs (for example scaffolding) which could reduce overall expenditure. Some 
measures might be tied to required expenditure as and when components of a house or flat 
comes to the end of its useful life; i.e. when a roof is replaced it would be cost effective to 
make use of the scaffolding to install a range of other measures at the same time (such as 
PV panels, resized guttering, solar thermal water heating panels, loft insulation).  
As well as working with national programmes, Climate Fife’s action plan has Scaling Up and 
Acceleration phases and a cross-cutting innovation working group to target this challenge.  
Monitoring and evaluation 
Monitoring is a very important part of Climate Fife. Regular monitoring followed by adequate 
adjustments of the plan allows the process to be one of continuous improvement and 
Climate Fife to be a living document. This monitoring report will be used to communicate 
with citizens and other stakeholders, keeping them informed on progress achieved, barriers 
encountered, opportunities, and any possible need for corrective measures. 
Formal reporting will be undertaken as follows: 
 A full monitoring report will be compiled for Fife Council actions annually and every 2 
years for the full action plan, in line with the Covenant of Mayors’ monitoring 
requirements. 
 An annual Climate Fife progress report will be presented to the Fife Partnership 
Board. 
 The Environment and Protective Services Committee of Fife Council will receive an 
annual update as part of the Public Bodies Duties Reporting (PBDR) requirements of 
the Climate Change (Scotland) Act  2009. Work with partners is reported in the wider 
influence section of this report and Climate Fife actions will be monitored through 
this. 
 As well as this annual reporting, progress will be monitored and reported through the 
Fife Environmental Partnership – a committee of community planning partners that 
meets 4 times a year. To ensure frequent oversight and strategic guidance for 
Climate Fife this committee will now have a standing item on Climate Fife progress.  
Climate Fife will be updated annually in line with reporting against strategy, targets and 
actions, of new available knowledge and expertise, of the latest technological or financial 
opportunities for sustainable energy projects and/or for adaptation action; in a continuous 
cycle of Plan, Do, Review, Action. Climate Fife will be comprehensively updated every 5 
years in line with EU guidance.  
Adaptation and mitigation involve very different approaches to monitoring and evaluation. 
While the metric for assessing climate mitigation success is clear (CO2), there is no single 
unit of measurement to understand the success of climate adaptation actions. True dynamic  
26 
 indicators of successful adaptation such as floods avoided, heat wave deaths prevented 
etc. cannot be measures.  
Mitigation monitoring requirements Adaptation monitoring requirements 
A formal commitment to making changes in the 
short term and in the long term Changes implemented immediately and in the long 
term 
Actions which may have an immediate effect on 
greenhouse gas emissions and which have a formal 
end goal (decarbonisation) A process that begins today but has gradual effects 
and which may not have a formal end-point 
One common indicator: measured levels of 
greenhouse gas emissions Multiple indicators which are often specific to a 
geographic area 
Source: LGiU https://www.lgiuscotland.org.uk/briefing/monitoring-and-evaluation-of-local-climate-change-adaptation/   
In line with the EU’s Sustainable Energy and Climate Action Plan guidance Climate Fife will 
evaluate climate risk and adaptation using quantitative and qualitative indicators, process, 
output and outcome indicators. The adaptation indicators used within Climate Fife have 
been selected from those recommended within the EU’s Covenant of Mayors guidance and 
the suite of over 100 national level indicators produced by ClimateXChange (CXC) which 
are used to monitor adaptation progress and identify trends in climate risks and impacts in 
Scotland.  
Full details of the indicators used for adaptation are in the Risk and Vulnerability 
Assessment. 
Opportunities to make a local area more climate-resilient arise with every new development 
project or policy change approved by local authorities. The impacts of missing such 
opportunities can be significant and will last for a very long time therefore it is vital that a 
robust method is used to assess which adaptation options are most appropriate, and when 
and where they should be implemented29. Fife Councils approach to assessing which 
adaptation options to include within the adaptation strategy and action plan is based on the 
latest best practice guidance produced for the Committee on Climate Change and will 
include a mixture of output indicators, outcome indicators and impact indicators30: 
Risk and Vulnerability Assessment (RVA) 
A Risk and Vulnerability Assessment of Fife’s climate-related risks is a prerequisite of a 
Sustainable Energy and Climate Action Plan. Fife Council analysed potential hazards and 
assessed the vulnerability that could pose a potential threat or harm to Fife. The outcome 
was used to shape the Adaptation theme of the Plan and the high-level actions in the action 
plan. A summary of the risk and vulnerability assessment will be available online at: 
www.fife.gov.uk/climatechange   
  
                                            
29 Ibid, pp13 
30 Power, K., England, K., Toplis, C. & Hoermann, B. (2018) Adaptation actions in cities: what works? Report of research findings, 
AECOM and Sniffer .https://www.theccc.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2018/11/Adaptation-actions-in-cities-what-works-final.pdf  pp13  
27 
 Baseline Emission Inventory (BEI) 
To set an emissions reduction target and to develop appropriate actions for the Climate Fife 
action plan, Fife Council needed to collate the following information: 
 An understanding of greenhouse gas emissions for Fife from a set starting point 
(what the Covenant of Mayor’s calls the Baseline Emissions Inventory or BEI) over 
which emission reduction trends can be measured; and 
 An understanding of how greenhouse gas emissions have changed since the 
baseline (the Monitoring Emissions Inventory or MEI); and 
 What might happen to Fife’s greenhouse gas emissions in the future.  
The BEI and MEI will allow the principal sources of Fife’s CO 2 emissions and their 
respective reduction potential to be identified31.  
Baseline emissions inventory (BEI) 1990 
Internationally the year used for carbon reduction baselines is 1990, as defined by the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC. After seeking government advice, Fife 
Council calculated its BEI to the international standard baseline of 1990 by extrapolating 
Fife’s carbon footprint back from the BEIS (Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy 
Department) dataset which beings in 2005, back to 1990 assuming Fife followed the 
national Scottish trend for the interim period 1990-2005. Extrapolating the carbon footprint 
back from known data to 1990 in line with the national trend, reveals: Fife’s 1990 carbon 
emissions are estimated to have been 49272.85 ktCO 2 in 1990.  
 
 
                                            
31 https://www.covenantofmayors.eu/support/faq.html   Industry & 
Commercial 
60%Domestic 
24%Transport 
16%Fife's carbon emissions by end use sector (1990) 
28 
 Monitoring emissions inventory (MEI) 2017 
The graph below shows Fife’s emission reductions since the 1990 baseline in kilotons of 
carbon dioxide and percentage. Actual carbon emission reduction has occurred from 1990 
to 2017, thereafter shows the linear carbon emission reduction required to meet targets.   
 
Recent trends in greenhouse gas emissions in Fife 
Key observations that can be drawn from these figures are that the greatest cuts to 
greenhouse gas emissions have been associated with a reduction in heavy industry in Fife. 
Despite an increase in population and the number of households, emissions from homes 
have remained at a constant proportion of the footprint over the last 25 years. This reflects 
wider societal trends i.e. as building standards and energy consuming equipment have 
become more efficient, the number of homes in the area has increased and the average 
Industry & 
Commercial 
56%
Domestic 
22%Transport 
22%Fife's carbon emissions by end use sector (2017)2017 MEI 
2045 net 
zero 
emissions 2040 90% 
CoM 40% target  
29 
 number of energy consuming gadgets within a typical home has dramatically increased 
since 1990. Furthermore, while emissions from land use / land use change and forestry 
have remained relatively constant, the proportion of emissions arising from the transport 
sector has risen significantly and continues to rise in line with emissions trends across 
Scotland. While industry and commerce continue to be the largest source of greenhouse 
gas emissions within Fife (primarily because of several large hydrocarbon industrial 
installations located within the Kingdom), emissions from all sectors have fallen dramatically 
except for emissions from transport, which have barely fallen since 1990.   
Emissions reduction target 
Climate Fife commits to surpass the Covenant of Mayor’s target of achieving a 40% 
reduction in greenhouse gas emissions by 2030 (over a 1990 baseline) because Fife 
Council has already achieved this target and the latest science suggests that more 
significant and rapid cuts in emissions are needed. Fife seeks to achieve a science-based 
target of a 75% reduction in greenhouse gas emissions by 2030, and to achieve net zero 
greenhouse gas emissions by 2045 in line with Scottish Government targets (which are 
based on recommendations from the Committee on Climate Change), as set out in the 
recently approved targets of the Climate Change (Scotland) 2019 Act.  
Meeting the target 
Fife Council recognises that meeting the target will be challenging for Fife Council and its 
partners. As far as is possible the actions within the Climate Fife action plans will attempt to 
quantify their emissions reduction impact. For some initiatives it may be possible to develop 
relatively detailed carbon emission reduction estimates once the business cases are 
developed, however for others it may be that only best estimates may be available.  
External factors which may impact progress against targets 
There are several external factors which will impact on Fife Councils ability to achieve their 
emission reduction goals including most notably, UK and Scottish government policies and 
the financial support Fife Council receives from central government. 
A key factor will be the decarbonisation of the electricity supply grid where generation from 
fossil fuels is rapidly being replaced by electricity generated from renewable energy. This 
will have a direct impact on the grid emission factor (a measurement of CO2 emissions 
intensity per unit of electricity generation tCO2/MWh).  
Demographic factors will also influence Fife’s emissions trajectory. According to the most 
recent Council Plan, by 2035:  
 Fife’s overall population is expected to increase to over 380,000; 
 Fife households are projected to rise by over 35,000 and the average household 
size is projected to fall further to 1.99; 
 Single adult households are projected to increase from 35% in 2010 to 43% in 
2035, with those aged over 75 showing the largest increase; 
 Fife’s overall child age population is expected to have decreased by 2000; 
 Fife’s working age population will see a steady decrease to 213,000 by 2035 (a 
reduction of around 23,000 or 10%);  
30 
  Fife’s older population (65+ age group) is expected to increase to 105,000 by 
2035 (an increase of nearly 41,000). 
These changes will have a significant impact on Fife’s future greenhouse gas emissions 
trajectory and the resilience of the population to future climate change. 
Other external factors which will impact on Fife Councils ability to cut emissions include 
BREXIT and the associated loss of access to European Union grant funding for climate 
change projects; and the impacts of climate change itself which may affect the seasonality 
of energy use and space heating demand in the winter and cooling demand in the summer. 
Action Plans 
It is recognised that in order to achieve the transformation needed over the next decade to 
tackle the climate emergency, a step-change needs to occur in attitudes, processes and 
business as usual priorities across Fife Council and other community planning partners, 
therefore a detailed 12 month climate emergency action plan of priority actions which need 
to be achieved before March 2021 is presented in Appendix A of this report. This 12-month 
emergency action plan includes urgent actions for the first 100 days and subsequent 
months and will lay the groundwork for delivering the full Climate Fife action plan for the first 
phase between 2021 and 2030, and subsequent phases between 2030 and 2050.  
The actions which should be carried out over the next decade under the 8 themes of work 
are presented in the draft mitigation and (high level) adaptation plan which is presented in 
Appendix B of this report.   
It is vital that the 12-month emergency action plan is delivered to achieve medium- 
and longer-term objectives.  
Climate Fife is a living document, and other actions will need to be developed, in 
conjunction with local stakeholders if Fife Council is to decarbonise Fife and achieve 
maximum resilience to climate change impacts.  
At this stage the Covenant of Mayors does not expect signatories to have developed 
detailed adaptation action plans. Therefore, Fife Council’s adaptation action plan is high-
level at present. Fife Council will work with community planning partners and local 
stakeholders from spring 2020 onwards to develop a detailed adaptation action plan of 
priority actions which should be taken between now and 2030 to increase Fife’s resilience 
to the unavoidable impacts of climate change. These projects will be developed to respond 
to the risks identified in the RVA. In addition, it is likely that new risks and hazards will 
emerge over the coming years as the climate continues to change and that these will need 
to be addressed in a timely fashion.  
   
31 
 Appendix A Climate Fife Action Plan, 12 Months to 
March 2021 
Action Area Description Climate Fife 
Actions 
 
Priorities for the first 100 days to be delivered by 30th May 2020  
Fife Council Climate 
Fife Delivery Group Support Services through a Climate Fife delivery group. 
Fife Council will implement a delivery group supported by 
Fife Resource Solutions. The Climate Fife Delivery Group 
will: 
 support Services in delivering actions required to 
meet the targets. 
 review Service Change Plans to identify support 
and action, including through the ‘Opportunity 
Papers’ process.  
 Deliver and co-ordinate projects for Services to 
meet targets.  
 Provide internal training and CPD and facilitate 
expert support and guidance 
 Report progress at appropriate management level 
 IC03, IC04, IC06, 
IC08, IC12, IC14, 
IC16, IC16b, 
IC23, , AD11 
Launch and begin 
implementing Fife 
Council Carbon 
Management Plan Deliver projects within the revised Carbon Management 
Plan (2020) to reduce Fife Council’s carbon emissions, 
including decarbonising fleet, energy efficiency, renewables 
development and updating design approaches. Carbon 
reduction in line with Scottish Government and Climate 
Emergency targets of 75% by 2030 net zero emissions by 
2045. (against 1990 levels).  EE01, EE04 (a-
c), LC01 (a-c), 
MST03, RE07, 
RE08, ST10 
 
Other priorities for the Emergency Action plan to be delivered by 30th March 2021  
Communications and 
behavioural change 
campaign Launch a cross-partner, Climate Change communications 
and behavioural change campaign within Fife. Providing a 
single message usable by communities and organisations 
emphasising the urgency of action to address the climate 
emergency and increasing climate literacy so that everyone 
can play their part in reducing emissions and increasing 
resilience.  IC15, IC17,  
Financial innovation Climate change actions do not always make sense using 
traditional financial metrics and payback calculations yet 
without them we know that the costs to society and to Fife 
Council could be catastrophic. New financial models are 
needed to support climate action. Fife will investigate and 
deliver innovative options to financially support Climate Fife 
actions IC04, IC07, IC08, 
IC19, IC20, IC21, 
EE09, EE13, 
MST05, MST08, 
ST11 
Housing Deliver energy efficiency measures across housing within 
Fife. Engage with housing sector to identify opportunities 
and challenges to ensure the optimum technical solutions 
are applied. Prepare for the tightening of Building 
Standards, a future without gas heating systems and zero 
carbon buildings. Ensure all housing staff are aware of 
these policy developments.  EE01, EE02, 
EE11, LC04  
32 
 Local Development 
Plan Prepare for revision of the of the Local Development Plan 
by reviewing existing policies, develop Fife’s climate risk 
and vulnerability evidence base and undertake a Low 
Carbon Place project.  AD09 
Partnership Asset 
Management Innovative partnerships will be needed to respond to the 
climate emergency. Develop partnership approaches to 
management of public asset including an asset sharing and 
Land Management plan. Fife Council will develop a 
coordinated land strategy to manage Fife Council land 
assets in a way that will best respond to the climate 
emergency; which recognises the many different and 
sometimes conflicting demands for Fife’s limited land 
resource. The latter should include a review of 
sequestration, reforestation and rewilding options and an 
urgent review to resolve barriers to tree planting IC16, IC20, IC21, 
IC22, EE12, 
LC05, CS07, 
AD03, AD04 
Food and diet Support delivery of local food initiatives including plant-
based diets, food waste and food re-distribution projects. 
Fife Council to support plant-based options within their own 
facilities and to ensure that land management plan 
considers local food production and food security . LC06, RE06, 
RE09, AD04, 
AD13 
Support Sustainable 
Transport Prepare for the revision of the Local Transport Strategy and 
support sustainable transport projects through active travel, 
Fife Council’s carbon management plan, Leven Rail Link 
Blueprint and Levenmouth Connectivity project. ST01, ST02, 
ST05, ST10,  
Adaptation Develop an Adaptation Plan for Fife.  This will link to the 
emerging Land Management Plan to manage Fife Council 
land assets in a way that will best respond to the climate 
emergency. This will include using Fife Council owned land 
to adapt to climate change and to ensure food and energy 
security. RE10, RE11, 
CS06, AD02, 
AD03, AD04, 
AD05, AD17 
Maximise benefit from 
procurement and 
Council expenditure Implement lifecycle assessment approaches to 
procurement – requiring energy, food, and other 
procurement options to consider carbon footprint could help 
to keep money in the local economy and reduce supply 
chain risks from climate change. Supporting staff choices 
through salary sacrifice schemes for low carbon 
technologies,  IC01, IC03, IC04, 
IC08, IC15, IC19, 
EE11, EE13, 
LC04, LC08< 
LC12, RE09, 
RE12,  
Waste Deliver the Zero Waste Fife  – Resources Strategy & Action 
Plan, including supporting plastic free community projects. 
Add waste to Fife Council’s carbon footprint.  RE01, RE07 
RE13 
Community Resilience  
Building Provide community wealth building and resilience through 
supporting community groups to deliver climate change 
projects, supported by Fife Environmental Partnership and 
facilitated by Fife Resource Solutions. LC05, AD02, 
AD12, AD13, 
AD14 
Lobby Government Lobby government on a number of national policy areas to 
support action within Fife, for example to tighten national 
standards, fill evidence gaps or to provide additional 
resources. IC13, IC16, IC19, 
EE09, EE10, 
LC07, MST08, 
ST11, CS05, 
AD08, AD10, 
AD12,  
  
33 
 Appendix B Climate Fife mitigation and adaptation action plan (2021-2030) 
This appendix presents projects that will be undertaken during the first plan phase (2021-2030). Note that only high-level adaptation actions 
are considered in this action plan. A detailed adaptation action plan will be developed in the first phase of Climate Fife (2020-22).  
Actions within the action plan are defined in several ways. Firstly, we have assessed whether an action will contribute to the three overarching 
principles: 
= climate friendly = climate ready  = climate just 
 
Climate Fife will be implemented in a phased approach of 5 phases of activity. Between now and 2050 there will be three plan periods, each 
comprising a decade. Actions within the action plan are assigned to a discrete plan period and phase. Some actions will stretch across 
multiple time phases, some will be undertaken across the whole life of Climate Fife. Diagram A1 illustrates how these plan periods and 
phases will fit together and the type of activity we expect to undertake during each period and phase. Some actions may continue in one form 
or other across plan periods and phases.  
Actions have been allocated to the following activity phases: 
 Ground work (2020-2022);  
 Scaling up (2023-2025);  
 Acceleration phase (2026-2040)  
 Near net zero (2041-45); and  
 Deliver SCCAP (2046-50).  
These phases are illustrated in diagram B1, and described in more detail below: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
34 
 Diagram B1: Climate Fife plan phases 
 
 
35 
 Ground work (2020-2022):  this phase will focus on easy wins including projects that can be delivered quickly. In addition, essential 
foundation activities will be implemented including: 
 developing financial instruments and new ways to finance projects;  
 consolidating political support;  
 engagement with key sectors;  
 building new partnerships and strengthening existing partnerships;  
 changing planning laws and creating new planning policy and guidance;  
 updating Fife Council policies in the light of new national climate change targets;  
 undertaking engagement programmes to support the public;  
 screening current developments at the planning stage for climate risk and emissions and working to adapt these to prevent potential 
climate liabilities from being built;  
 developing tools for impact evaluation and successful implementation;  
 and deployment of small-scale test projects.  
The importance of a sense of urgency, political consensus and appetite for action is consolidated during this period, and that any actions 
which can be started now, begin in earnest.  
Scaling up (2023-2025):  during this phase smaller projects will be completed as exemplars and activity will turn to how to use the lessons 
learned for larger scale deployment. Integrating learning into new project proposals will be fast-paced and collaborative. This is the phase 
where teething troubles will be most apparent as new technologies and ideas are tested in the real-world. It’s likely that some ideas and 
technologies may not be progressed beyond this period if they do not work out, and that new exemplar projects will be conceived as 
technology develops. Ground will be being broken for some large projects, and lots of planning will be underway for many more. Some 
ground-work activities will still be ongoing such as developing planning guidance and financial instruments and public engagement. Long term 
projects such as reforestation which will take time to deliver their benefits need to be being implemented during this period if not before. Large 
scale developments are expected to mostly focus on known technologies and approaches that have low risk but high benefit to best assure 
success. As new technologies emerge during the delivery of Climate Fife, these will be considered and tested using the same staged 
approach. 
Acceleration of mitigation and adaptation actions (2026-2040): In many ways this is the main phase of Climate Fife.  Small projects have 
gained momentum and are being rolled out at neighbourhood or settlement-wide and in some cases, even Fife-wide scales. While many 
teething problems will have arisen during the scaling up phase some challenges will only arise at larger scales of deployment or as new 
technologies come on stream during the acceleration phase. These will have to be rapidly overcome. Legislation is prohibiting many fossil 
fuel technologies and maladaptive practices. Low and zero carbon alternatives are becoming the norm. Activity during this period will be akin  
36 
 to a war effort as every aspect of Fife’s economy, infrastructure, land use and built environment is overhauled to reduce emissions and 
increase resilience. Carbon sequestration activities become a major component of the Fife economy. Unfortunately, climate extremes are 
also becoming the norm and the already challenging Climate Fife work programmes will have to accommodate this.  
Near net zero GHG (2041-45): While the previous phase saw the bulk of carbon reduction; activity during this phase action turns toward 
phasing out other greenhouse gases (most notably nitrous oxide and refrigerants with high global warming potential) and ensuring that 
sequestration projects are sufficient to absorb any emissions which cannot be phased out. While we will be starting to see the benefits of 
long-term projects it is also likely that some extreme impacts of climate change and associated socioeconomic impacts (large scale climate 
migration for example) will be being experienced in earnest. 
Deliver SCCAP (2046-50):  This phase sees a net zero Fife dealing with the more extreme impacts of climate change and adapting existing 
actions in the light of the latest climate science and observed impacts. The benefits of large-scale adaptation projects are being felt but 
adaptation will be a continuous process for the foreseeable long-term future as long-term changes such as sea level rise play out over the 
coming decades and centuries.  
 
Actions are also defined by which source of emissions they will reduce using BEI sectors from the Covenant of Mayors template:  
     
  
  
  
  
  
     
 
The action plan also defines actions by the type of activity that is needed from identified leads or partnerships. Actions are defined as: 
 Direct – for actions where there is an identified lead or partnership to take forward measures directly; 
 Enable – for actions where partners need to work together and enable each other to act; 
 Support – for actions where an identified lead or partnership provides support for others to act; and  TRANSPORT  
Municipal fleet  
Public transport   
Private and commercial 
transport   BUILDINGS, EQUIPMENT/FACILITIES AND 
INDUSTRIES  
Municipal buildings, equipment/facilities  
Tertiary (non-municipal) buildings, 
equipment/facilities  
Residential buildings  
Public lighting OTHER   
Agriculture, Forestry, Fisheries  
OTHER NON-ENERGY RELATED  
Waste management  
Waste water management  
Other non-energy related  ENERGY 
Local electricity production  
Local heat/cold production   
37 
  Policy – for actions where Fife Council needs to change Council policy (this may be procurement policy, planning policy etc) to remove 
barriers to action for itself and others. 
Finally, actions are defined by how they will enable Fife Council and partners to comply with national climate change policy and targets. 
Compliance relates to which target below the action relates to and will enable compliance with. A summary of climate change targets for 
Scotland is presented in Diagram B2 below, with a more detailed timeline in Diagram B3. 
Diagram B2: Summary of Scottish Government climate change and energy targets 
Scottish Government Climate Change and Energy targets Year  
100% of Scotland’s electricity demand equivalent to be produced from renewables 2020 
56% reduction in greenhouse gas emissions (compared to 1990 baseline) 2020 
Delivery of national adaptation programme 202432  
75% reduction in greenhouse gas emissions (compared to 1990 baseline) 2030 
Phasing out of new petrol and diesel vehicle sales 2032 
The equivalent of 50% of the energy for Scotland’s heat, transport and electricity consumption to be supplied by renewable sources 2030 
An increase by 30% of the productivity of energy use across the Scottish economy 2030 
90% reduction in greenhouse gas emissions (compared to 1990 baseline) 2040 
No more than 5% of Scottish households in fuel poverty 2040 
Net carbon neutral 2040 
Net zero greenhouse gas emissions 2045 
                                            
32 And every five years thereafter 
  
38 
 Diagram B3 
Scottish climate 
change target 
timeline Climate and energy targets (UK & Scotland)
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
2029
2030
2031
2032
2033
2034
2035
2036
2037
2038
2039
2040
2041
2042
2043
2044
2045
2046
2047
2048
2049
2050
Climate Fife plan period:
Climate Fife activity phase:
Every home offered smart meter y
30% total energy consumption from renewables y
100% electricity consumption from renewables y
11% heat demand from renewables y
1GW community and locally owned renewable energy projects in Scotland y
56% cut in GHG emissions y
12% reduction in energy use y
Social Housing EESSH 1, EPC C/D dependent on building type y
9.75% share of renewable fuels in transport y
Set up public not for profit Scottish energy company y
Private rented homes to achieve EPC E y
Private rented homes to achieve EPC D y
No more that 15% households in fuel poverty y
30% increase in productivity of energy use across Scottish economy y
Private rented and households in fuel poverty to achieve EPC C y
50% of total energy consumption from renewables y
Social Housing EESSH 2, Checkpoint y
2 GW community and locally owned renewable projects in Scotland y
75% cut in GHG emissions (Scotland) y
75% cut in GHG emissions (Fife Council target) y
14% share of renewable fuels in transport y
Only low carbon vehicles available for purchase (Scotland) y
Aim for new homes to achieve near zero carbon (where feasible) y
EPC band C for all homes (where feasible) y
No more than 5% households in fuel poverty y
90% cut in GHG emissions (Scotland) y
Effectively carbon neutral (CO2e emissions) y
Social Housing EESSH 2, min. EPC B/C dependent on building type y
All owner occupied housing to achieve EPC C y
Near zero GHG emissions y
Fully decarbonised heat supply (Scotland) y
All Scottish homes near zero carbon (where feasible) y
* SCCAP: Scottish Climate Change Adaption ProgrammeFirst plan period Second plan period Third plan period
Groundwork Scaling up Acceleration (main phase of action) Near net zero Deliver SCCAP* 
39 
  
ID Action Description  Lead Partners BEI 
sector 12-
month 
action? Activity 
type Phase Alignment with 
vision 
  
   
IC01 Fife Council 
Climate Fife 
Delivery 
Group Within the first 100 days Fife will support 
Services through the establishment of a 
Climate Fife Delivery Group, supported by 
Fife Resource Solutions. This Climate Fife 
Delivery Group will: 
 Support services in delivering actions 
required to meet the targets  
 Review Service Change Plans to 
identify support and action, including 
through the ‘Opportunity Papers’ 
process 
 Deliver and coordinate projects for 
Services to meet targets 
 Provide internal training and CPD 
and facilitate expert level support and 
guidance 
 Report progress at appropriate 
management level 
 Fife Council  Fife Resource 
Solutions All Yes Direct, 
support 
and policy Ground 
work 
(2020-22)  Yes Yes Yes 
IC02a Commit to a 
carbon neutral Community planning partners work together 
to ensure that all senior officers and elected 
members within Fife Council (and Trusts) 
have undertaken carbon literacy training, Fife Council  Fife Council 
Trusts, 
Community All  Direct, 
support All Yes Yes Yes 
 
40 
 Fife by 2045 
at the latest  climate risk training and have become 
climate leaders themselves, with further 
plans brought forward to disseminate these 
issues through the thinking and decision 
making of all directorates. Implement 
Continued Professional Development to 
increase science and engineering literacy for 
decision makers to help them best 
understand the potential solutions. Consider 
engagement with the forthcoming COP in 
Glasgow.  planning 
partners 
IC02b Fife Council to review the current staffing 
resource distribution, and skillsets within the 
Council. There may be business case for 
spend to save investment in skills and new 
posts.  Fife Council  Training 
providers, third 
sector 
partners, 
support 
organisations  All Yes Direct Ground 
work 
(2020-22)  Yes Yes Yes 
IC02c Fife Council induction and working practices 
to include energy and resource efficiency, 
reflecting the Fife climate emergency. Basic 
resource efficiency actions to be included 
within job competencies using the Integrated, 
Social & Material Framework to ensure that 
desired behaviours are supported.  Fife Council   All  Direct, 
and policy  Ground 
work 
(2020-22) 
Scaling-
up (2023-
25) Yes Yes Yes 
IC03 Revise 
existing 
policies to 
reflect the 
climate 
emergency  Fife Council will when reviewing and revising 
policies and strategies, ensure that they are 
compatible with delivering the Climate Fife 
vision and reflect the Fife Climate Emergency 
by use of the Fife Environmental Assessment 
Tool (FEAT)  Fife Council  Community 
planning 
partners All  Policy, 
Direct and 
Support Ground 
work 
(2020-22) 
Scaling-
up (2023-
25) Yes Yes  Yes 
IC04 Investigate 
and deliver 
innovative 
options to 
financially Fife Council will work partners to design, fund 
and commission (or deliver in-house) detailed 
advice on the timescales, actions and 
budgets needed to deliver a carbon neutral 
Fife by 2045. Fife Council will work with Fife Council  Academia, 
community 
planning 
partners, third 
sector, Fife All Yes Policy Ground 
work 
(2020-22)  Yes Yes Yes  
41 
 support 
Climate Fife 
actions partners to develop business cases for low 
carbon and transport investments using 
alternative financing models. This may 
require financial innovation such as whole life 
costing, municipal bonds, a climate fund, an 
internal carbon cost, or the establishment of 
an Energy Services Company to deliver 
locally generated low carbon energy and 
heat. 
The Council will act as an exemplar by 
introducing formal climate screening of all its 
budgets; with the 2021-22 budget being used 
to pilot budget setting against a backdrop of 
climate risks. Focus on opportunities, shared 
benefits approach, fostering innovation and 
providing officer time to think outside of 
business as usual.  
Fife Council will explore options that increase 
financial benefits through linked energy 
systems / whole energy systems models. 
This will develop a process to investigate 
potential improved financial returns where 
energy project business cases are linked. 
Investigate “Agency” models where a third 
party could aggregate supply and demand for 
an industrial estate to maximise the 
commercial benefits to the businesses. also 
test them out so we can find out what works 
in different situations, the margin for the 
Council and how they can be used together.    citizens, the 
business 
community  
IC05 Develop a 
communicatio
ns strategy 
and engage in 
climate 
strategy to 
raise Within the first 100 days Fife Council and 
partners will develop a climate change 
communications strategy that will emphasise 
that climate change action is an urgent 
priority. 
Fife Environmental Partnership will work with 
community organisations to develop this Fife 
Council, 
Fife 
Environme
ntal 
Partnership  Community 
groups, third 
sector, 
FCCAN, 
Greener 
Kirkcaldy, 
CLEAR All Yes Direct and 
support All Yes Yes Yes  
42 
 awareness, 
identify risks 
and 
opportunities 
and develop 
shared 
projects communication strategy, and maximise 
resources to support and community action 
and minimise bureaucratic barriers 
The strategy will: 
 Include climate literacy and deliver 
training to local people in how to 
reduce their carbon footprint and 
increase their resilience to climate 
change.  
 support and celebrate the activities of 
community groups 
 regular climate conversations with 
residents, the third sector and the 
business community through 
Community Planning structures 
 promote local action e.g. Beach 
clean-ups 
 Link to national campaigns and 
events e.g. Climate week.  Buckhaven & 
Methil, 
Sustainable 
Cupar, St 
Andrew’s 
Environmental 
Network, 
Transition 
network, 
Extinction 
Rebellion  
IC06a Provide 
regular 
progress 
reports  Fife Council will provide regular interim 
progress reports on delivery against Climate 
Fife to Full Council, Fife Environmental 
Partnership, the Sustainable Growth and City 
Deal Board and direct to the Chief Executive.  Fife Council  Fife 
Environmental 
Partnership  All Yes Direct All Yes Yes Yes 
IC06b Fife Council will report back to the people of 
Fife annually on what it (and community 
planning partners) have done to address the 
climate emergency and what we are planning 
to do. Climate Fife progress reports will be 
published with committee papers online and 
via social media.  Fife Council  Community 
groups, third 
sector, Fife 
Environmental 
Partnership,  All Yes Direct All Yes Yes Yes 
IC07 Innovative 
financing for 
public good  Council, community groups and the third 
sector to work together on grant funded 
projects for community energy schemes and 
other climate change projects. The Council’s Fife Council  Private sector 
developers, 
Scottish 
Futures Trust, All  Direct and 
support All Yes Yes Yes  
43 
 business support and funding support 
advisors will be made available to support 
community investment in renewable energy 
and grant applications for community climate 
change projects.  Promote investment and 
align public sector capital investment to 
unlock developer funding for transport and 
education infrastructure.  Improvement 
Service 
IC08 Assess the 
impact of all 
policy 
decisions, 
budgets and 
investments 
on climate 
change 
mitigation and 
adaptation, 
and other 
externalities. Fife Council will use an environmental 
screening tool to ensure that all policy and 
investment decisions made by the Council 
consider the climate emergency and other 
environmental issues. All decisions made by 
the Council and its partners in response to 
the climate emergency will also be supported 
by equality assessments as well as the Fairer 
Scotland duty to maximise their positive 
effects and reduce any negative impacts.  Fife Council  Fife Council 
Trusts, 
community 
planning 
partners All Yes Direct and 
policy Ground 
work 
(2020-22) 
Scaling-
up (2023-
25) Yes Yes Yes 
IC09a Support future 
generations in 
responding to 
the climate 
emergency  Fife’s educational establishments will engage 
openly with pupils on the climate emergency 
and actions which are needed to respond to 
it. Fife Council will work closely with schools, 
local colleges and universities to build the 
skills and capacity for a greener and more 
resilient economy in Fife. Including a focus 
on new technologies (battery storage, heat 
pumps, ULEV, other renewables), forestry 
and food production, and ensuring the 
provision of apprenticeships and other 
opportunities for inclusive growth. 
Schools will use the EcoSchools programme 
to support young people to engage in climate 
change. Fife Environmental Partnership will 
link to 2050 Climate Group and other young 
people’s organisations / charities dealing with Fife 
Council. 
Fife 
Environme
ntal 
Partnership  Fife College, 
University of 
St Andrews, 
Community 
groups, third 
sector; 2050 
Climate Group  All  Direct and 
support All Yes Yes  Yes  
44 
 the interplay between climate change and 
intergenerational equity  
IC09b Review investment in the school and further / 
higher education estate to ensure carbon 
reduction, climate resilience and climate 
education are core principles.  Fife Council  Fife College, 
University of 
St Andrews  All  Direct and 
support All Yes Yes  Yes 
IC10a Provide 
support, 
training, and 
information to 
help national 
and local 
partners to 
deliver energy 
reduction and 
decarbonisatio
n programmes 
across Fife  Deliver energy reduction and decarbonisation 
training programmes to reduce business 
outgoings and reduce business failure rates.  Business 
Improveme
nt District  Fife Council  All  Support All Yes Yes Yes 
IC10b Supply expert training, support and 
information to SMEs and third sector with 
regards to climate change obligations such 
as LHEES. This could include greater 
Council engagement with the forthcoming 
COP in Glasgow.  Fife Council  Fife Council  All  Support All Yes Yes Yes 
IC11a Update and 
implement 
Fife Council’s 
Carbon 
Management 
Plan Within the first 100 days Fife Council will 
update Council Carbon Management Plan in 
line with new national and Climate Fife 
targets.  Fife Council   Municipal 
buildings, 
residential 
buildings, 
municipal 
fleet, 
public 
lighting  Direct  Ground 
work 
(2020-22)  Yes - Yes 
IC11b Investigate and develop what additions are 
required to Building Standards for Fife 
Council assets to be net zero emissions by 
2045 at the latest (and possibly as early as 
2030 depending on the outcome of a national 
policy review expected in Spring 2020) and 
reduce running costs and Council revenue 
spend.  Fife Council  Scottish 
Government, 
social housing 
providers, 
volume 
housebuilders, 
local building 
industry All 
buildings   Direct, 
policy and 
support Ground 
work 
(2020-22) 
Scaling-
up (2023-
25) Yes Yes Yes  
45 
 IC12 Strengthen 
low carbon 
and climate 
ready actions 
within the City 
Deal 
workstreams Fife Council Climate Fife Delivery Group to 
review and develop City Deal actions to 
support delivery of the net zero carbon target 
and increased climate adaptation actions.   Fife Council  City Deal 
partners Buildings 
and 
infrastruct
ure Yes Direct, 
policy and 
support Ground 
work 
(2020-22) 
Scaling-
up (2023-
25) Yes Yes Yes 
IC13 Lobby the 
Scottish 
Government 
to embed 
climate 
change action 
into public 
procurement 
processes and 
financial 
practices  Fife Council will work with other Local 
Authorities and the Scottish Government to 
consider whether any legislative change is 
needed to allow carbon reduction and climate 
resilience to be mainstreamed into 
procurement decisions, Scottish Government 
funding (for example should the Scottish 
Futures Trust only fund zero carbon 
buildings) and financial processes (i.e. loan 
pooling, ring fencing of climate grant funding 
for example). In the light of the outcome of 
this exercise, Fife Council will review and 
update its procurement and financial 
processes accordingly.  Fife Council  Scottish 
Government, 
other local 
authorities  All Yes Direct, 
policy and 
support Ground 
work 
(2020-22)  Yes Yes Yes 
IC14 Strengthen 
climate 
actions within 
the Plan4Fife  Review and develop Plan4Fife actions to 
support delivery of national net zero carbon 
targets and adaptation programme.  Fife 
Resource 
Solutions, 
Fife 
Environme
ntal 
Partnership  Fife Council, 
community 
planning 
partners All  Yes Direct, 
policy and 
support Ground 
work 
(2020-22) 
Scaling-
up (2023-
25) Yes Yes Yes 
IC15 Adopt an 
emissions 
modelling tool  Fife Council will adopt an emissions 
modelling tool to quantify the impact of 
Climate Fife mitigation and sequestration 
actions and to inform future target-setting.  Fife Council  Scottish 
Government, 
SSN, 
academia  All  Direct Ground 
work 
(2020-22) 
Scaling-
up (2023-
25) Yes - Yes  
46 
 IC16a Collaborative 
partner 
development 
and action 
across all 
Climate Fife 
programme 
areas 
 Work with partners in The Leven Programme 
to develop innovative renewable energy 
opportunities in the Leven catchment area  The Leven 
Partnership 
Board Fife Council, 
CLEAR 
Buckhaven & 
Methil Local 
energy 
productio
n  Direct and 
support All Yes - Yes 
IC16b Carry out all the actions identified by the 
Association for Public Services Excellence 
(APSE) for dealing with the climate 
emergency.  APSE Other local 
authorities  All Yes Policy, 
direct and 
support Ground 
work 
(2020-22) 
Scaling-
up (2023-
25) Yes Yes Yes 
IC16c Develop a sustainable joint campus for 
Dunfermline high school and Fife College  Fife Council  Fife College, 
Scottish 
Government  Municipal 
buildings, 
tertiary 
buildings   Direct and 
support Ground 
work 
(2020-22) 
Scaling-
up (2023-
25) Yes Yes Yes 
IC16d Support and develop a Local Heat and 
Energy Efficiency Strategy (LHEES) with the 
Scottish Government.  Fife Council  Scottish 
Government  Municipal 
buildings, 
tertiary 
buildings  Direct and 
support Ground 
work 
(2020-22) 
Scaling-
up (2023-
25) Yes Yes Yes 
IC16e NHS Fife to develop Sustainable 
Development Action Plan (SDAP) based on 
National NHS benchmarking exercise  NHS Fife  Scottish 
Government  Municipal 
buildings, 
tertiary 
buildings  Support Ground 
work 
(2020-22) 
Scaling-
up (2023-
25) Yes Yes Yes 
IC16f Work with Fife Community groups to engage 
their members Fife 
Environme
ntal 
Partnership Community 
groups, third 
sector,  All Yes Direct and 
support Ground 
work 
(2020-22) 
Scaling-Yes Yes Yes  
47 
 up (2023-
25) 
IC17 Support and 
encourage 
behaviour 
change and to 
tackle 
resistance to 
change 
through the 
development 
of a bottom-up 
behaviour 
change 
strategy for 
Community 
Planning 
partners  Develop a communications and engagement 
strategy to support people to change  
highlighting what individuals can do and 
presenting a positive vision of future Fife. 
Having people understand and be motivated 
to reduce energy consumption and to 
decarbonise is essential to the success of 
energy solutions. Fife Council and partners 
will develop staff communications campaigns 
via new and existing staff communications 
channels, including suggestion of a daily tip 
over a month; targeting skills sectors; CPD, 
Masterclasses etc. Process for learning 
lessons to embed these. Communications 
campaign also linked to schools and 
education staff and incorporation of the 
climate emergency into the curriculum and 
extra-curricular activities Fife 
Environme
ntal 
Partnership
, Fife 
Resource 
Solutions Third sector, 
FCCAN, and 
other 
community 
partners  All  Yes 
 Direct and 
support All Yes Yes Yes 
IC18 Gather 
evidence to 
inform 
lobbying Many of the actions within this action plan 
advocate lobbying Scottish Government to 
update legislation or technical standards. 
However, before Government can be 
effectively lobbied there is a need to gather 
evidence and the views of other 
stakeholders. Fife Council will contribute to 
evidence gathering by government via 
consultations and Parliament hearings and 
also investigate the most appropriate 
avenues for lobbying government out with 
formal consultations i.e. SOLACE the 
proposed, High ambition climate change 
network etc.  Fife Council  Other local 
authority 
partners, Fife 
Environmental 
Partnership, 
third sector, 
professional 
associations All Yes Direct and 
support Ground 
work 
(2020-22) Yes Yes Yes  
48 
 IC19 Investigate 
incentives to 
cut emissions 
and use 
resources 
efficiently Investigate options to develop incentives to 
reward behaviour which helps to tackle the 
climate emergency (such as cutting 
emissions, reducing waste or increasing 
resilience). Incentivisation should be 
introduced where possible. Without negative 
and positive incentives, the progress towards 
targets will be considerably slower. Other 
municipalities have offered reductions in 
Council tax, free parking, public transport 
vouchers or awards and prizes for individuals 
and municipality staff who make significant 
strides in cutting emissions. Fife Council will 
consider similar ideas. Policies will be 
designed carefully so that the impact of 
change is fairly distributed. Price signals 
should act on all Fifers, but in a proportionate 
manner. Fife Council  Fife 
Environmental 
Partnership, 
third sector, 
community 
groups, local 
business, 
other public 
sector bodies All  Direct and 
support Ground 
work 
(2020-22) Yes Yes Yes 
IC20 Partnership 
agreements Develop simplified partnership agreements 
for Fife Council and others to speed up 
coordinated working and accelerate the take 
up of scalable projects. The climate 
emergency requires a fast response and 
partnership agreements are quicker to deliver 
than formal strategy. Fife Council  Community 
planning 
partners, 
private sector, 
third sector, 
community 
groups All  Direct Ground 
work 
(2020-22) 
Scaling-
up (2023-
25) Yes Yes Yes 
IC21 New delivery 
vehicles / 
establishment 
of joint 
ventures Existing organisational structures may not be 
able to deliver the rapid innovations needed 
in the short window of opportunity that is 
available. Fife Council to commission a 
review of the best approaches to deliver 
energy, carbon, sequestration outcomes this 
should include the use of the ALEO and other 
joint ventures able to act as aggregators and 
delivery agents for delivering community 
projects across Fife by providing technical Fife Council  Fife Resource 
Solutions (Fife 
Council’s 
environmental 
ALEO) 
Community 
planning 
partners, 
private sector, 
third sector, All  Yes Direct, 
support Ground 
work 
(2020-22) 
Scaling-
up (2023-
25) Yes Yes Yes  
49 
 and funding support and access to Council 
assets and land if needed. community 
groups 
IC22 Custodian 
register List of key organisations acting on climate 
change in Fife, and a named contact for each 
project to enable sharing and innovation. 
Consider a tagging system to support this, 
e.g. providing contact information for a Fife 
Council lead with named officer, summary of 
project, aspiration for next steps, links where 
available to maximise the opportunities to 
learn lessons and roll out innovation as 
efficiently as possible.  Fife Council  All All Yes Policy, 
support Ground 
work 
(2020-22) 
Scaling-
up (2023-
25) Yes Yes Yes 
IC23 Climate Fife 
expert register Develop register of people with technical 
expertise relevant to Climate Fife and willing 
to share this knowledge with community 
planning partners via CPD, masterclasses 
and other means.  Fife 
Environme
ntal 
Partnership All All Yes Policy, 
support Ground 
work 
(2020-22) 
Scaling-
up (2023-
25) Yes Yes Yes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
50 
  
ID Action Description  Lead Partners BEI 
sector 12-
month 
action?  Activity 
type  Phase Alignment with vision  
 
   
EE01 Reduce 
energy 
demand from 
street 
infrastructure  Light Fife Green to replace all Fife street 
lighting lamps with energy efficient 
equipment, including LEDs  
 Fife 
Council  Public 
Lighting Yes Direct Ground-
work 
(2020-22)  Yes No Yes 
EE02a Improve 
domestic 
energy 
efficiency in-
line with 
national 
guidelines, 
striving for 
beyond the 
legal 
minimum 
where 
possible Install energy efficient measures in 
Council owned domestic housing stock 
(through EESSH [Energy Efficiency 
Standard for Social Housing] & HEEPS: 
ABS [Home Energy Efficiency 
Programmes Scotland: Area Based 
Scheme] and future energy efficiency 
support programmes)  Fife 
Council Scottish 
Government  Resident
ial 
Buildings  Yes Direct Ground-
work 
(2020-22), 
Scaling up 
(2023-25),  Yes Yes Yes 
EE02b Support the installation of energy efficient 
measures in non-Council owned housing 
stock (through EESH & HEEPS: ABS and 
future energy efficiency support 
programmes)  Housing 
association
s Fife Council  Resident
ial 
Buildings  Yes Direct Ground-
work 
(2020-22), 
Scaling up 
(2023-25),  Yes Yes Yes 
 
51 
 EE02c Support the installation of energy 
efficiency improvements in off-gas and 
rural areas and install measures into rural 
Fife Council housing stock  Fife 
Council  Resident
ial 
Buildings  Yes Direct and 
support Scaling up 
(2023-25)  Yes Yes Yes 
EE03 Prepare for 
Scottish 
Government 
new home 
targets Review policy implications for new build 
housing and non-residential buildings that 
from 2024 these must use renewable or 
low carbon heat. Consider in revisions of 
plans, such as the Local Development 
Plan and the Local Housing Strategy.  Fife 
Council Scottish 
Government  Resident
ial 
Buildings  Direct, 
and 
support Ground-
work 
(2020-22), 
Scaling up 
(2023-25), 
Acceleratio
n (2025-
40) Yes Yes Yes 
EE04a Implement 
Fife Council’s 
Carbon 
Management 
Plan (CMP)  Fife Council will act as an exemplar for 
the rest of Fife and develop a programme 
of carbon reduction measures for its own 
estate and activities in response to the 
targets set out by Climate Fife and 
national climate change legislation. The 
Carbon Management plan is being 
revised to reflect the Climate Emergency 
and will be resubmitted to Fife Council 
Committee in April 2020.  Fife 
Council Scottish 
Government  Municipa
l 
Buildings  Yes Direct Ground-
work 
(2020-22),  Yes - Yes 
EE04b Fife Council will implement a programme 
of investment in its existing built assets to 
improve their energy efficiency and help 
deliver carbon neutrality by 2045, or 
earlier if mandated by Government. The 
ability to deliver this action is predicated 
on appropriate funding being made 
available by central government. This will 
involve a large-scale energy efficiency 
retrofit programme using an Energy 
Management Revolving Fund, amongst 
other funding measures. It will not be 
possible to achieve national carbon Fife 
Council Scottish 
Government  Municipa
l 
Buildings  Yes Direct Ground-
work 
(2020-22), 
Scaling up 
(2023-25), 
Acceleratio
n (2025-
40) Yes Yes Yes  
52 
 targets without a large scale retrofit 
programme of existing buildings.  
EE04c Monitor energy consumption within Fife 
Council buildings and those that we lease 
to ALEOs and Trusts. Close monitoring of 
consumption will allow technical faults 
and billing errors to be quickly identified 
and rectified. Improve BEMS and smart 
monitoring to make it easier to keep track 
of energy consumption in real time. There 
should be wider installation and central 
control of Building Energy Management 
Systems to reduce energy consumption 
and avoid localised changing of controls 
delivering more energy / heat than is 
required.  Fife 
Council Utility 
companies, 
FRS, Fife 
Sports and 
Leisure Trust, 
Fife Cultural 
Trust, Fife 
Coast and 
Countryside 
Trust etc  Municipa
l 
Buildings  Yes Direct All Yes - Yes 
EE05 Continue to 
promote 
energy 
efficiency 
advice 
services for 
Fife  Work to support and direct Fifers towards 
energy efficiency advice programmes 
such as Cosy Kingdom which deliver 
energy efficiency assistance direct to Fife 
households, helping to reduce fuel 
poverty and greenhouse gas emissions. 
Cosy Kingdom is a free and impartial 
energy and debt advice service available 
to all tenants and homeowners across 
Fife. Greener 
Kirkcaldy, 
St 
Andrew’s 
Environme
ntal 
Network, 
Citizens 
Advice and 
Rights Fife  Fife Council  Resident
ial 
buildings   Support, 
direct All Yes Yes Yes 
EE06 Support 
social 
housing 
providers in 
reducing the 
energy 
demand of 
their 
properties  Work with local social housing providers 
to improve the energy efficiency of Fife’s 
social housing; with the aim of scaling up 
and accelerating existing work so that we 
reduce emissions from heating homes 
and buildings to near-zero by 2045, (in 
line with advice from the Committee on 
Climate Change and mandated under the 
Climate Change Scotland Act, 2019). 
Partners are already working to Ore Valley 
Housing 
Association
, other 
social 
housing 
providers  Fife Council, 
Scottish 
Government  Resident
ial 
Buildings   Support All Yes Yes Yes  
53 
 significantly improve the energy efficiency 
of their housing stock. For example, the 
energy efficiency renewal works being 
done by Ore Valley Housing Association 
on their 675 domestic properties.  
EE07 Work with 
local partners 
to improve 
the energy 
efficiency of 
their property 
portfolios  University of St Andrews will implement a 
suite of energy efficiency projects (funded 
through a revolving fund) to reduce the 
carbon intensity of their property assets. 
The emissions from these buildings 
should be reduced to near-zero by 2045, 
(in line with advice from the Committee on 
Climate Change and mandated under the 
Climate Change Scotland Act, 2019).  University 
of St 
Andrews  Fife Council, 
Scottish 
Government,  Municipa
l 
Buildings  Yes Direct Ground-
work 
(2020-22), 
Scaling up 
(2023-25), 
Acceleratio
n (2025-
2040) Yes Yes Yes 
EE08 Work with 
partners to 
develop 
ambitious 
targets for 
energy 
efficiency for 
existing 
buildings  Work with Scottish Government and local 
partners to develop new, ambitious 
targets to address the low levels of 
energy efficiency and carbon-intensive 
heating that are a feature of Fife’s older 
housing stock, and rural off-gas network 
properties, most of which are in private-
ownership, private-rented or mixed-tenure 
ownership. Decarbonising these 
properties will lead to considerable social, 
health and wellbeing and economic co-
benefits and help to deliver the goals of 
the Plan for Fife. HEEPS: ABS needs to 
be reconfigured to deliver net zero 
buildings.  Fife 
Council Scottish 
Government, 
Housing 
Associations, 
private sector 
housing 
providers 
(landlords 
and lettings 
agencies),  Resident
ial 
Buildings
, 
Municipa
l 
Buildings
, 
Tertiary,  Direct, 
policy, 
support Scaling up 
(2023-25), 
Acceleratio
n (2025-
2040) Yes Yes Yes 
EE09 Lobby 
government 
for additional 
funding for 
energy 
efficiency 
projects for Fife Council has already achieved nearly 
all of the most obvious energy efficiency 
improvements for its own building stock, 
but we are far from net zero. The energy 
efficiency works which still need to be 
undertaken are more complex, costly and 
have longer payback periods; additional Fife 
Council  Scottish 
Government, 
Other local 
authority 
partners,  Resident
ial 
Buildings
, 
Municipa
l 
BuildingsYes Direct Ground-
work 
(2020-22), 
Scaling-up 
(2023-25)  Yes Yes Yes  
54 
 public and 
private sector  revenue will be needed from Central 
Government to ensure built assets can be 
decarbonised in line with national targets.  
There needs to be more support in 
particular for the private rented sector and 
owner occupiers to tackle those not 
persuaded by the limited grants/ loans 
currently available.  , 
Tertiary, 
EE10 Lobby 
government 
for stronger 
national 
policy on zero 
carbon 
buildings in 
Building 
Standards. Fife Council recognises that the 
technologies with which to build zero 
carbon buildings are already established 
and in regular use in other parts of the 
world (. Furthermore, with over 160,000 
homes in Fife today all of which will need 
retrofitting to achieve net zero standards 
between now and 2040, every new 
building built today that is not zero carbon 
will add to the retrofit challenge. Given, it 
is much more expensive to retrofit these 
technologies to existing buildings; Fife 
Council will work with other local 
authorities to lobby Scottish Government 
and SEPA to fast-track zero carbon 
design into building standards as soon as 
possible.  Fife 
Council Scottish 
Government, 
Other local 
authority 
partners Resident
ial 
Buildings
, 
Municipa
l 
Buildings
, 
Tertiary, Yes Policy Ground-
work 
(2020-22), Yes Yes Yes 
EE11 Optimise 
technical 
solutions and 
share best 
practice Affordable Housing Programme, and 
Property Services to engage with 
technical providers (including private 
developers) to identify opportunities and 
challenges, cost differentials vs savings, 
process or management requirements to 
ensure the optimum technical solutions 
are applied to new builds, and that 
expected benefits are realised. Fife 
Council Private 
developers, 
housing 
associations, 
commercial 
property 
management 
companies, 
Scottish 
Government, 
other Local 
Authority Resident
ial 
Buildings
, 
Municipa
l 
Buildings
, 
Tertiary, Yes  Support Ground-
work 
(2020-22), Yes Yes Yes  
55 
 partners, 
other 
Community 
Planning 
partners 
EE12 Rationalisatio
n and asset-
sharing In partnership with the community, Fife 
Council will develop an asset 
rationalisation strategy which considers 
duplicated provision in communities 
balanced against need to minimise undue 
travel burden for facilities users (which 
also has carbon implications). Fife 
Council Community 
Councils, 
Councillors, 
Community 
groups  Municipa
l 
buildings
, 
Tertiary, Yes Policy and 
direct Ground-
work 
(2020-22), 
Scaling-up 
(2023-25) Yes Yes Yes 
EE13 Salary 
sacrifice / 
inducements Fife Council is the largest employer in Fife 
and encouraging Council employees to 
reduce their carbon intensity could have a 
major impact on Fife-wide emissions. 
Review Fife Council salary sacrifice 
scheme to assess if it can be used to 
support the uptake of energy efficiency, 
low emission vehicle or renewable energy 
measures by staff. Linking to existing 
loans for energy efficiency from the EST, 
Scottish Government etc Fife 
Council Energy 
Saving Trust, 
Scottish 
Government Resident
ial 
buildings
, private 
transport Yes Support Ground-
work 
(2020-22), Yes  Yes 
 
 
 
 
 
56 
 ID Task Description  Lead Partners BEI 
sector 12 
month 
action? Activity 
type Phase Alignment with vision  
  
   
LC01a Implement 
Fife Council’s 
Carbon 
Management 
Plan (CMP)  No new fossil fuel heating systems can be 
installed in Fife Council new builds from 
2024. Business cases for developments 
before 2024 should consider whole life 
costs including the replacement of fossil 
fuel heating systems beyond 2024.  If 
business cases demonstrate that it is 
unavoidable to install a fossil fuel heating 
system between 2020-24 then designs 
must demonstrate ability to be retrofitted 
with low carbon alternatives as soon as 
practicably feasible, and the cost 
implications.  Fife 
Council  Municipal 
Buildings  Yes Direct Ground-
work 
(2020-22)  Yes Yes Yes 
LC01b Council new builds and renovations to 
include low carbon heat or electricity 
generation where practicably possible. 
Business cases for developments before 
2024 should consider whole life costs 
including the replacement of fossil fuel 
heating systems beyond 2024. If business 
cases demonstrate that installing 
renewable heat or electricity generation is 
not possible between 2020-24 then 
designs must demonstrate ability to be 
retrofitted post 2024 and the cost 
implications of delaying installation.  Fife 
Council Scottish 
Government  Municipal 
Buildings  Yes Direct Ground-
work 
(2020-22)  Yes Yes Yes 
LC01c Monitor low carbon technology prices and 
look to incorporate low carbon generation Fife 
Council  Municipal 
Buildings,  Direct All Yes Yes Yes 
 
57 
 technologies (both heat and power) onto 
Fife Council built assets as soon as 
financially viable.  Residenti
al 
Buildings  
LC02 Implement 
the Climate 
Change 
(Scotland) 
2019 Act  No new fossil fuel heating systems in any 
newbuilds within Fife by 2024 in 
compliance with the new Climate Change 
Act and updates to Building Standards.  Fife 
Council Scottish 
Government, 
local utilities, 
housing 
developers, 
the building 
industry All 
buildings   Direct, 
support, 
policy Scaling-
up (2023-
25) Yes - Yes 
LC03 Review 
existing Fife 
Council policy 
and plans to 
enable low 
carbon 
development  Prepare for the next revision of, and 
periodically review and update the Local 
Development Plan thereafter, to support 
and enable low carbon development.  Fife 
Council Scottish 
Government  All Yes Policy  Ground-
work 
(2020-22)  Yes Yes Yes 
LC04 Promote and 
install low 
carbon 
technologies 
across Fife’s 
housing stock  Support partners seeking to develop local 
low carbon energy and heat generation 
for housing. For example, the Ore valley 
500kw wind turbine & 12kW of Solar PV  Ore Valley 
Housing 
Association  Community 
groups  Domestic  Yes Direct Ground-
work 
(2020-22)  Yes Yes Yes 
LC05 Develop a 
land strategy 
to manage 
Council land 
assets as a 
resource in 
tackling 
climate 
change, to 
produce low 
carbon 
energy and to Fife Council will develop a coordinated 
land strategy to manage Fife Council land 
assets in a way that will best respond to 
the climate emergency; which recognises 
the many different and sometimes 
conflicting demands for Fife’s limited land 
resource. This should consider a whole 
system approach to land use; encourage 
multiple simultaneous uses and the siting 
of activities on the most appropriate land. 
This will include using Fife Council owned 
land to produce renewable energy, timber Fife 
Council Various other 
stakeholders 
including 
SNH, 
Forestry 
Commission 
Scotland, 
Scottish Land 
Trust, 
Community 
groups  All Yes Policy Ground-
work 
(2020-22) Yes Yes Yes  
58 
 balance this 
against other 
land use 
needs wood fuel, biomass fuel, reduce flood risk, 
encourage active travel, reduce food 
miles, absorb carbon by tree planting etc. 
The land strategy should also consider 
the renewable energy potential of water 
bodies and coastline and investigate more 
dynamic and pro-active use of vacant and 
derelict land to deliver local, low carbon 
energy.  
LC06 Support 
partners 
seeking to 
develop local 
low carbon 
energy and 
heat 
generation for 
non-domestic 
purposes.  Support other public bodies in 
investigating the feasibility of low carbon 
energy and heat generation and support 
their installation where appropriate. 
Explore collaboration opportunities i.e. 
University of St Andrews extending solar 
PV deployment on campus; Scottish 
Water’s extensive deployment of solar PV 
onto waste water and water treatment 
facilities across Fife is leading the 
development of public sector renewables. 
Scottish Water are also investigating the 
use of waste heat for heating purposes.  University 
of St 
Andrews,  
Scottish 
Water Fife Council Municipal   Direct Scaling 
up (2023-
25) Yes Yes Yes 
LC07 Lobby 
government 
for additional 
funding for 
renewable 
energy and 
heat projects  Fife Council has already installed many 
renewable energy and biomass heat 
installations meaning that the most 
economical opportunities have already 
been exploited (by and large). The low 
carbon energy and heat projects which 
still need to be undertaken are more 
complex, costly and have longer payback 
periods; which means that the capital 
funds available are often insufficient. 
Additional revenue will be needed from 
Central Government to ensure that we 
can decarbonise our built assets in line 
with national targets.  Fife 
Council  Scottish 
Government, 
Other local 
authority 
partners,  Residenti
al 
Buildings, 
Municipal 
Buildings, 
Tertiary,  Direct Ground-
work 
(2020-
22), 
Scaling-
up (2023-
25) Yes Yes Yes  
59 
 LC08 Work with 
local 
communities 
to develop 
low carbon 
energy and 
heat 
generation 
projects 
seeking to 
install 
renewables 
on public 
sector 
buildings and 
land and land 
held in 
common 
good Work with communities to secure funding 
for low carbon energy and heat 
generation developments. Implement 
projects to establish local, community-
owned (or part-owned), renewables 
including PV cooperatives, small scale 
hydro etc. Work in cooperation with other 
agencies. This should include exploring 
options for low carbon technologies in 
conservation areas and for how to use the 
energy generated to reduce fuel poverty 
and best respond to local economic and 
social needs.  Fife 
Environme
ntal 
Partnership  FCCAN and 
other 
Community 
groups, third 
sector, 
housing 
associations Residenti
al 
Buildings, 
Municipal 
Buildings, 
Tertiary,  Direct Ground-
work 
(2020-
22), 
Scaling-
up (2023-
25) Yes Yes Yes 
LC09 Partnership 
working to 
develop wider 
and 
innovative 
renewable 
energy and 
heat schemes 
with regional 
partners Fife Council will seek partners to facilitate 
larger scale low carbon generation in Fife 
such as larger solar farms, low carbon 
district heating and heat pump schemes 
and other large-scale renewable energy 
and heat generation opportunities that 
may be too large for community groups to 
want to run. Other opportunities which will 
be investigated include working with the 
University of St Andrew’s and other 
partners to explore the geothermal 
potential of the Scottish Midland Valley 
Hot Saline Aquifer which lies beneath 
parts of Fife and the Firth of Forth which 
could provide a low carbon heat source, 
and which could be tied into planned 
regeneration initiatives such as 
Levenmouth Reconnected. Fife Council 
will liaise in initial steps with University of Fife 
Council Other local 
authorities, 
private 
developers, 
other public 
sector 
bodies, large 
landowners Residenti
al 
Buildings, 
Municipal 
Buildings, 
Tertiary,  Direct Ground-
work 
(2020-
22), 
Scaling-
up (2023-
25) Yes Yes Yes  
60 
 St Andrews on this opportunity. We will 
also approach other local authorities to 
explore a more regional approach to 
sustainable energy and heat opportunities 
(such via the Tayplan and SESPlan). This 
should investigate joint developments and 
revenue sharing.  
LC10 Provide 
education 
and support 
for using new 
low carbon 
technologies Fife Council will provide support (directly, 
and via community and third sector 
partners) to local people and businesses 
in how to use low carbon technologies 
such as heat pumps, EV, hybrid vehicles 
etc to maximise the efficiency of these 
technologies and to increase user 
satisfaction. Education will be provided at 
schools, tenant briefings, community 
events, online etc.  Fife 
Council Community 
groups, third 
sector, 
housing 
associations Residenti
al 
Buildings, 
Municipal 
Buildings, 
Tertiary,  Direct Ground-
work 
(2020-
22), 
Scaling-
up (2023-
25) Yes Yes Yes 
LC11 Map Fife to 
identify low 
carbon 
generation 
potential An audit and map of Fife is required to 
show where the opportunities for low 
carbon energy are to direct action. This 
will build upon the existing heat map and 
should include renewable heat and 
electricity generation sources and 
opportunities to capture waste heat from 
existing operations and processes and 
use this as a low carbon heat source. 
Scottish Water Horizons heat from sewers 
for example. This map should also include 
geothermal potential. Fife 
Environme
ntal 
Partnership  Residenti
al 
Buildings, 
Municipal 
Buildings, 
Tertiary,  Direct Ground-
work 
(2020-
22), 
Scaling-
up (2023-
25) Yes Yes Yes 
LC12 PV 
generation 
linked to 
parking and 
potentially, 
EV charging. Review successful schemes in other 
areas (Stirling / Falkirk) for PV linked to 
car parking. Fife 
Council Other local 
authority 
partners All 
buildings, 
Private 
and 
commerci
al 
transport,  Policy Ground-
work 
(2020-
22), 
Scaling-
up (2023-
25) Yes Yes Yes  
61 
 LC13 Housing 
Services to 
plan for 
transition to 
low carbon 
heating Use Housing Annual Plan to build in 
transition to alternative heat source. 
(SHIP) A strategic direction for alternative 
low carbon heat required from Scottish 
Government which can then be adopted 
by the annual strategic housing Plan – 
SHIP. Fife 
Council Scottish 
Government Municipal 
Buildings, 
Residenti
al 
Buildings  Direct Ground-
work 
(2020-
22), 
Scaling-
up (2023-
25) Yes Yes Yes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ID Action Description  Lead Partners BEI sector  12-
month 
action? Activity 
type Phase Alignment with 
vision 
 
62 
  
  
MST01 Review 
existing Fife 
Council policy 
and plans to 
support district 
heating and 
other local 
energy 
networks  Periodically review and update the Local 
Development Plan to support and enable 
innovative energy solutions which support a 
whole energy systems approach, and which 
encourage more efficient movement, storage 
and transformation of energy.  Fife Council  Scottish 
Government  All 
buildings, 
Industry, 
Tertiary, 
local heat 
production, 
local 
energy 
production   Policy Ground work 
(2020-22), 
Scaling up 
(2023-25), 
Acceleration 
(2025-40)  Yes Yes Yes 
MST02 Collaborative 
working to 
create local 
energy 
networks 
through 
projects. 
Introduce 2 
workstreams 
for projects: 
Available 
Technology 
and Innovation 
to run in 
parallel. Work with public sector, utility supply 
companies and other businesses to drive the 
energy transition and support the 
development of projects that drive forward 
the development of smart grids, hydrogen 
fuel networks etc such as the WESLID 
project. The aim is to deliver the biggest 
emission reductions for the lowest cost; 
which will require mostly utilising available 
technology in the early years (i.e. 
technologies which are market ready, 
proven, etc will be quicker to roll out). Focus 
on replicable approaches, ideally scaled up 
from pilots, with consideration for how to 
scale across all Fife or in partnership across 
Scotland. 
Develop a parallel programme of innovation 
where this links to local opportunity in Fife. 
Expectation that this will be smaller scale. 
Look to scale-up mirroring the available 
technology programme’s approach.  SGN, 
SPEN etc,  Fife Council, 
FCCAN, 
Greener 
Kirkcaldy, 
CLEAR 
Buckhaven & 
Methil, St 
Andrew’s 
Environment
al Network, 
Sustainable 
Cupar, All  Direct, 
support 
and 
policy Ground work 
(2020-22), 
Scaling up 
(2023-25), 
Acceleration 
(2025-40)  Yes Yes Yes 
MST03 Implement 
Carbon Investigate opportunities to grow and develop 
existing energy networks, such as: 
Glenrothes Energy Network; University of St Fife Council  University of 
St Andrews  Domestic, 
Tertiary Yes Direct, 
support All Yes Yes Yes 
 
63 
 Management 
Plan (CMP)  Andrews network within current and future 
iterations of the CMP. This should include the 
investigation of geothermal potential.  and 
policy 
MST04 Support 
mandatory 
inclusion of 
district heating 
into national 
building 
standards via 
a phased 
approach  Alongside other Scottish Local Authorities, 
Fife Council will support calls for the 
mandatory inclusion of district heating 
systems, where feasible in all major new 
housing developments and renewal projects 
as part of national building standards. 
Options which allow the distribution of cool in 
the summer should be prioritised in the 
forthcoming update of Building Standards to 
address future climate change.  Fife Council  Other 
Scottish 
Local 
Authorities, 
Scottish 
Government  Residential 
Buildings, 
Municipal 
Buildings, 
Tertiary, 
local heat 
production,   Support Scaling up 
(2023-25), 
Acceleration 
(2025-2040)  Yes Yes Yes 
MST05 Seek 
measures to 
amend non-
domestic rates 
assessments 
for district 
heating Fife Council and partners will seek measures 
by the Scottish Government to amend non-
domestic heating rates assessments for 
domestic district heating installations to 
encourage the use of district heating in place 
of standalone heating in new build and 
refurbished homes (where densities and 
building envelopes allow).  Fife Council  Scottish 
Government  Residential 
Buildings, 
local heat 
production, 
local 
electricity 
production,   Support Ground-work 
(2020-22), 
Scaling up 
(2023-25),  Yes Yes Yes 
MST06 Explore 
options to 
build more 
district heating 
networks and 
local energy 
networks 
within Fife  Continue to explore opportunities for district 
energy (heating and cooling provision) for 
Fife Council complexes. Strive to implement 
these where technically feasible, which may 
require innovative approaches to project 
finance and payback periods  Fife Council  Scottish 
Government, 
Scottish 
Futures 
Trust, grant 
funders, 
community 
groups  Residential 
Buildings, 
local heat 
production, 
local 
electricity 
production,   Support All  Yes Yes Yes 
MST07 Develop 
LHEES (Local 
Heat and 
Energy Develop strategic approach to energy 
efficiency and decarbonised heating, within 
the wider work to enable a whole energy 
system, in line with anticipated legislative Fife Council  Community 
groups such 
as Greener 
Kirkcaldy, 
CLEAR 
Buckhaven & Residential 
Buildings, 
local heat 
production, 
local  Support Ground-work 
(2020-22), 
Scaling up 
(2023-25),  Yes Yes Yes  
64 
 Efficiency 
Strategy)  requirement to develop a Fife Local Heat and 
Energy Efficiency Strategy.  Methil, 
Sustainable 
Cupar, St 
Andrew’s 
Environment
al Network, electricity 
production,  
MST08 Lobby 
government 
for additional 
funding for 
local energy 
and heat 
networks  District heating and local energy network 
projects are more complex, costly and have 
longer payback periods than present capital 
funding allows for when designing new 
assets. Additional revenue will be needed 
from Central Government to ensure 
decarbonisation of built assets in line with 
national targets and to allow local heat 
networks to become sufficiently mainstream 
that associated prices fall due to economies 
of scale. Fife Council  Scottish 
Government, 
Other local 
authority 
partners,  Residential 
Buildings, 
Municipal 
Buildings, 
Tertiary, Yes Direct Ground-work 
(2020-22), 
Scaling-up 
(2023-25)  Yes Yes Yes 
MST09 Develop a 
local energy 
network 
solution for  
industrial 
estates Develop a portal energy centre model for 
industrial/commercial units as a foundation 
for a wider industrial energy system, drawing 
on local generation, energy storage and 
supply, for both new and retrofit of existing 
business clusters in Fife. This will include the 
role of business energy use as a system 
anchor. Timeline proposal [years]: 1-2 
development, 2-5 pilot, learning from lessons 
and scaling up, 5-10 roll out. Explore 
industrial options around M90 Junction 3 as 
an early greenfield pilot in conjunction with 
the Shared Education Campus, the Strategic 
Development Area, the Park & Choose and 
the Council’s depot. Explore options around 
Levenmouth as a brownfield field pilot. The 
pilot outputs will include a case study for 
business to enable replication.   Fife Council  Other local 
authority 
partners, City 
Deal 
partners,  Tertiary 
(non-
municipal) 
buildings, 
equipment/ 
facilities 
local heat 
production, 
local 
electricity 
production,  Direct, 
support, 
policy Ground-work 
(2020-22), 
Scaling-up 
(2023-25) Yes Yes Yes  
65 
 MST10 Develop a 
programme of 
local energy & 
climate 
masterplans Develop a programme of a local masterplans 
across Fife covering mitigation (energy and 
sequestration) and adaptation actions linked 
to local need. Approach to consider utilities 
such as energy, water & sewerage, for a 
wide range of need such as buildings and 
transport.  This will build on the existing work 
in Fife and will integrate into: 
 Local Community Plans 
 proposed Local Area Plans,  
 LHEES, and 
 Proposed Land Use Plan 
This will include sector specific approaches 
where needed, such as for Industrial estate 
action plans building on the portal energy 
centre approach. Masterplans will prioritise 
options which deliver more than one Climate 
Fife theme, such as generation and energy 
storage or sequestration. 10 settlement plans 
will be undertaken in the first 5 years. 
 Fife Council  Other local 
authority 
partners, 
consultancy, 
academia, 
Scottish 
Government, 
community 
groups, 
Community 
Councils, 
FCCAN, 
Greener 
Kirkcaldy, 
CLEAR 
Buckhaven & 
Methil, 
Sustainable 
Cupar, St 
Andrew’s 
Environment
al Network, All  Direct Ground-work 
(2020-22), 
Scaling-up 
(2023-25) Yes Yes Yes 
 
 
 
 
ID  Description  Lead Partners BEI sector  12-
month 
action? Activity 
type Phase Alignment with 
vision 
 
66 
   
  
ST01a Update and 
implement Fife 
Council’s 
Local 
Transportation 
Strategy  Revise previous transport strategy, policy 
and plans, as required, to deliver evolving 
climate change and energy targets. The new 
strategy will enforce Transport Scotland’s 
sustainable transport hierarchy and will 
include ambitious targets for modal shift with 
associated delivery plans. To meet these 
targets the new strategy will prioritise 
pedestrians and cycling strategies over road 
building schemes whilst encouraging low 
carbon transport use.  Fife Council Key stake 
holders Public 
transport, 
Private and 
commercial 
transport, 
Municipal 
vehicles  Policy Ground-
work (2020-
22) Yes Yes Yes 
ST01b As part of the new strategy, Fife Council will 
consider how to reduce the dominance of the 
private car and how to make Fife more 
appealing for active travel e.g. looking at 
increasing pedestrianisation, incentivising car 
sharing, rolling-out car clubs, reducing speed 
limits on residential roads, implementing 
workplace parking taxes, developing car-free 
zones near locations attended by large 
numbers of potentially vulnerable pedestrians 
and further improving the public realm to 
encourage active travel.  Fife Council  Key 
stakeholders 
including 
community 
groups  Public 
transport, 
Private and 
commercial 
transport, 
Municipal 
vehicles  Policy Ground-
work (2020-
22) Yes Yes Yes 
ST01c Make innovation a core principle of the Local 
Transportation Strategy; improving freight 
modal choice, working with public transport 
operators to increase access and 
affordability, improve accessibility for all, and 
the development of hydrogen and other 
ULEV networks should be investigated and 
actioned where feasible. Climate change 
should inform the whole strategy.    Fife Council  Key 
stakeholders, 
local 
transport 
operators, 
community 
groups Public 
transport, 
Private and 
commercial 
transport, 
Municipal 
vehicles  Policy Ground-
work (2020-
22) Yes Yes Yes 
 
67 
 ST01d As part of the new strategy look at options for 
reducing the environmental impact of freight 
movements in Fife.  Fife Council  Online 
retailers, 
Sustrans and 
key 
stakeholders  Private and 
commercial 
transport   Policy, 
direct 
and 
support Scaling-up 
(2023-25), 
and 
Acceleratio
n (2025-40)  Yes Yes Yes 
ST02 Develop active 
travel network  Continue, and where possible accelerate the 
implementation of a programme of active 
travel and network development for walking 
and cycling. Where possible this will deliver 
safe, high quality, segregated cycling arterial 
routes. Greenspace is a key resource for 
active travel and for increasing wellbeing and 
uptake of active travel. It is important that 
new developments are well connected to 
active travel routes. To ensure that the next 
generation grow up embracing active travel 
continue to implement School Travel Plans, 
with supporting initiatives, Bikeability, WOW 
(Walk Once a Week), Park & Stride, etc  Fife Council  Sustrans, 
Paths4all, 
Cycling 
Scotland, 
Sustrans, 
School PTA 
and pupils 
Greener 
Kirkcaldy, 
CLEAR 
Buckhaven & 
Methil, 
Sustainable 
Cupar, Public 
transport  Yes Support All Yes Yes Yes 
ST03 Develop EV 
infrastructure  Continue and where possible, accelerate, the 
phased approach to planning and 
implementing EV charging facilities across 
Fife. Note that the expansion of EV charging 
facilities will have a consequential increase in 
electricity consumption and careful 
submetering will be required to manage this 
energy. New locations where chargers could 
be installed could be developed in 
partnership with other organisations (for 
example super market car parks so that EV 
can charge as people shop)  Fife Council  Scottish 
Government 
(including 
Switched on 
Fleets) Private and 
commercial 
transport, 
Municipal 
vehicles,   Direct 
and 
support All Yes - Yes 
ST04 Update the 
Council Fleet 
Plan to 
decarbonise 
Fife Council’s The latest programme of work for the 
Scottish Government requires public sector 
bodies to decarbonise their vehicle fleets 
rapidly. Therefore, Fife Council’s fleet 
management and replacement plan (2019-Fife Council  Other public 
sector 
partners  Municipal 
vehicles  Direct 
and 
support Scaling-up 
(2023-25), 
and Yes - Yes  
68 
 own vehicle 
fleet in line 
with Climate 
Change 
Scotland Act  29) will be revised to reflect the new 
requirement for public bodies to phase out 
the need for any new petrol and diesel light 
commercial vehicles by 2025 and for all 
vehicles by 2030. This will involve exploring 
the potential for further integrating electric 
and hydrogen fuelled vehicles into the 
Council fleet.  Acceleratio
n (2025-40)  
ST05 Support the 
reinstatement 
of the 
Levenmouth 
rail line, and 
other viable 
rail links that 
have been 
closed.  Fife Council will support the reopening of the 
Levenmouth rail line. Detailed designs are 
currently being drawn up for the Levenmouth 
link, which will connect Leven to the Fife 
Circle. It is estimated the project, which also 
includes improved bus services, cycle and 
walking facilities will be operational within five 
years and will include new railway stations at 
Leven and Cameron Bridge. Reopening the 
line will connect an estimated 35,000 people 
to the Scottish railway network and reduce 
car dependence in Levenmouth and East 
Neuk. Other rail links which have been 
closed which could be investigated for future 
reinstatement include the reopening of 
Newburgh station, and the Dunfermline to 
Alloa line.  Scottish 
Government  Levenmouth 
rail 
campaign, 
Network rail, 
Fife Council  Public 
transport, 
Private and 
commercial 
vehicles Yes Support Scaling-up 
(2023-25),  Yes Yes Yes 
ST06 Support 
national plans 
to de-
carbonise 
railway rolling 
stock Fife Council will work with the Scottish 
Government and other partners to 
decarbonise Scotland's passenger rail 
services by 2035. Fife’s railway lines 
currently use diesel rolling stock. Where 
trains cannot be electrified, the Scottish 
Government has committed to invest in 
battery-powered trains and work with 
developers of hydrogen fuel cell trains to 
accelerate deployment in Scotland. Detailed 
national timescales and actions for Scottish 
Government, 
Transport 
Scotland, 
Network Rail  Fife Council  Public 
transport   Support Acceleratio
n (2025-40)  Yes - -  
69 
 decarbonising rail services will be released in 
spring 2020.  
ST07 Improve the 
fuel and 
carbon 
efficiency of 
local private 
sector and 
public 
transport fleets Continue to promote Eco Stars Fleet & Taxi 
Recognition Scheme which offers advice on 
best practice to fleet operators of goods 
vehicles, taxis, buses and coaches to 
improve efficiency and reduce fuel 
consumption and associated emissions. 
Promote the reduced operating costs of EV 
and hybrid vehicles to private fleet operators 
at points of contact (i.e. taxi fleets at 
licensing).  Fife Council  Local 
haulage, bus 
and taxi 
companies  Municipal 
fleet, Public 
transport, 
Private and 
Commercia
l transport   Support 
and 
deliver Ground-
work (2020-
22), 
Scaling-up 
(2023-25)  Yes - Yes 
ST08 Tackle 
problematic air 
quality Implement actions from Fife Council’s two 
existing Air Quality Management Areas to 
improve air quality and unlock climate 
change, emissions and health and wellbeing 
co-benefits.  Fife Council  SEPA Municipal 
fleet, Public 
transport, 
Private and 
Commercia
l transport   Deliver All Yes Yes Yes 
ST09 Support fleet 
operators to 
comply with 
the 
requirements 
of new Low 
Emission 
Zones in 
Dundee, 
Edinburgh, 
Glasgow and 
Aberdeen.  ECOstars to work with public transport and 
commercial fleet operators to assist them in 
adjusting to the new LEZ (low emission 
zones) being rolled out in major cities across 
Scotland between 2018-2020. Most relevant 
to Fife vehicle operators are the new LEZ 
zones in Dundee and Edinburgh.  Other local 
authorities 
(City of 
Edinburgh, 
Glasgow City 
Council, 
Dundee City 
Council, 
Aberdeen 
City Council)  Local 
haulage, bus 
and taxi 
companies  Municipal 
fleet, Public 
transport, 
Private and 
Commercia
l transport   Support Ground-
work (2020-
22) Yes Yes Yes 
ST10a Implement Fife 
Council’s 
Carbon New fleet vehicles be Ultra Low Emission 
vehicles from 2030, and public sector fleets 
need to decarbonise by 2025. Fife Council 
will cease specifying and procuring 
conventional combustion engine vehicles and Fife Council  Scottish 
Government  Municipal 
fleet Yes Direct Scaling-up 
(2023-25), 
Acceleratio
n (2025-40)  Yes - Yes  
70 
 Management 
Plan upskill the vehicle maintenance teams 
accordingly. Fife Council has already begun 
replacing current vehicle inventory with EVs 
and hydrogen powered vehicles and this will 
continue at pace to meet the 2025 target in 
the Scottish Government’s programme of 
work.  
ST10b Investigate opportunities to reduce the 
Council’s grey fleet and to encourage the 
decarbonisation of staff vehicles. This could 
be via a reinstatement of a leasing scheme or 
other kind of partnership approach to 
encourage employees to switch from Petrol / 
Diesel cars to Hybrid or fully electric cars.  Fife Council  Fife Council 
staff and 
contractors  Public 
transport, 
Private and 
commercial 
transport  Yes Direct Ground-
work (2020-
22), 
Scaling-up 
(2023-25)  Yes Yes Yes 
ST11 Lobby 
government 
for additional 
funding to 
maintain new 
transport 
assets Permeable paving and path surfaces, and a 
large-scale expansion of the cycle network 
will lead to significant increases in the 
maintenance demands put upon Councils. 
Additional revenue will be needed from 
Central Government to ensure that these vital 
new assets are maintained. Fife Council will 
lobby government for this resource as a 
priority to ensure that travel within Fife can be 
decarbonised in a timely manner and ensure 
that we can continue to expand the active 
travel network.  Fife Council  Scottish 
Government, 
Sustrans  Private and 
commercial 
transport  Yes Direct Ground-
work (2020-
22), 
Scaling-up 
(2023-25)  Yes Yes Yes 
ST12 Promote and 
support low 
emission 
vehicle fleet 
expansion and 
charging 
network 
across Fife  Support partners across Fife to develop 
electric vehicle charging infrastructure. For 
example, Ore Valley Housing Association 
and the expansion of their electric fleet 
expansion and installation of chargers at 2 
sites. Supporting local partners will help all 
Fifers adapt to changes in the law whereby 
fossil fuel internal combustion engine 
vehicles will no longer be sold in Scotland 
from 2032.  Scottish 
Government,  Transport 
Scotland, 
Fife Council, 
Ore Valley 
Housing 
Associatio,  
other public 
sector 
partners Public 
transport, 
Private and 
commercial 
transport   Support Ground-
work (2020-
22), 
Scaling-up 
(2023-25)  Yes - Yes  
71 
 ST13 Promote and 
support green 
travel 
initiatives 
within Fife 
Council and 
other major 
employers 
within Fife  Increase the use of mobile ICT and remote 
working within Fife Council teams (reducing 
the need to travel to base) and car and lift 
sharing to reduce commuting miles and 
associated emissions. University of 
St Andrews  Fife Council  Public 
transport, 
Private and 
commercial 
transport   Support All Yes Yes Yes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ID Action Description  Lead Partners BEI 
sector 12-month 
action? Activity 
type Phase Alignment with vision  
  
   
 
72 
 RE01 Implement 
“Zero Waste 
Fife” Fife’s 
Resources 
strategy and 
action plan  Promote Zero Waste Scotland’s waste 
reduction campaigns such as Love Food 
Hate Waste  Fife Council  Zero Waste 
Scotland, 
Greener 
Kirkcaldy, 
CLEAR 
Buckhaven & 
Methil, 
Sustainable 
Cupar, St 
Andrew’s 
Environmental 
Network,  Other  Support Groundwork 
(2020-22)  Yes - Yes 
RE02 Promote and facilitate reuse, including 
running a reuse pilot at recycling centres.  Fife Council   Other  Support 
and 
direct Scaling-up 
(2023-25),  Yes - Yes 
RE03 Fife Council will promote and facilitate 
recycling (for example by improving waste 
stream monitoring and collection efficiencies 
by piloting new technology).  FRS, Fife 
Council Zero Waste 
Scotland  Other  Direct All Yes - Yes 
RE04 Replace landfill of waste with energy 
recovery for residual waste  Fife Council   Other  Direct Acceleration 
(2025-40)  Yes Yes - 
RE05 Fife Environmental Partnership will work to 
reduce single use plastic waste and support 
public sector organisations in Fife to end 
single use plastic consumption.  The use of 
plastics in textiles has a significant negative 
impact on ocean health because of the 
discharge of textile microplastics from 
washing machines. Fife Council will consider 
how our procurement specifications can be 
used to champion natural fibre use in textiles 
and furniture.  Fife 
Environmental 
Partnership  Fife Council, 
other 
community 
planning 
partners, Zero 
Waste 
Scotland  Other  Support 
and 
direct Scaling-up 
(2023-25), 
Acceleration 
(2025-40)  Yes - Yes  
73 
 RE06 Publish a 
food strategy 
for Fife Fife Environmental Partnership will work with 
local stakeholders to produce a local food 
strategy for Fife which will look at improving 
the quality, health benefits, affordability, 
access to and reduce the environmental 
impacts of food consumed within Fife. Policy 
options which could be considered include 
making space for food growing a requirement 
of new housing developments in the future to 
help improve food security.  Promotion of 
plant-based diet (or at least a focus on less 
meat consumption). Promoting the health, 
social and environmental benefits and 
impacts on cutting meat/dairy. Presenting the 
environmental benefits of local, grass fed 
meat should also be included. 
Other options include looking to improve the 
sustainability of school meals and meals on 
wheels (and all other catering provided by the 
Council) in line with national policy direction 
to use public procurement to tackle the 
climate emergency. Engaging school children 
on food production / consumption will also be 
included in the strategy. Ultimately the aim 
should be to switch to locally grown sources 
for food in Council institutions, and to 
introduce more allotments.  Fife 
Environmental 
Partnership,  Fife Council, 
third sector, 
community 
groups, 
FCCAN, 
Nourish 
Scotland, 
Permaculture 
Scotland  Other  Support 
and 
direct Scaling-up 
(2023-25),  Yes Yes Yes 
RE07 Include 
waste in Fife 
Council’s 
carbon 
footprint Fife Council will update its carbon footprint 
calculation methodology from 2020 to include 
waste and waste management. This will bring 
Fife in line with foot-printing best practice.  Fife Council   Other Yes Direct Ground-
work (2020-
22) Yes Yes Yes 
RE08 Include 
water 
consumption 
in Fife Fife Council will update its carbon footprint 
calculation methodology from 2020 to note 
water consumption (this will have to be 
carefully presented to avoid double counting Fife Council   Other Yes Direct Ground-
work (2020-
22) Yes Yes Yes  
74 
 Council’s 
carbon 
footprint with Scottish Water’s national footprint). 
Closer monitoring and reporting of water 
consumption is anticipated to lead to better 
management and will increase Fife’s 
resilience to climate change risks such as 
water scarcity and will reduce the carbon 
emissions associated with water pumping 
and processing.  
RE09 Investigate 
increasing 
plant-based 
options for 
Fife Council 
catering.  
 Fife Council Facilities Management will trial 
meat free days at its facilities to promote 
wellbeing and raise awareness that reducing 
meat consumption is part of the range of 
available climate mitigation options. Fife 
Council Facilities Management will trial a 
meat free school catering day and use this to 
inform and guide plans.  Fife Council Fife Council, 
NFU, Soil 
Association, 
Community 
Groups, 
Nourish 
Scotland, 
Permaculture 
Scotland, Other Yes Direct, 
policy Ground-
work (2020-
22) Yes Yes Yes 
RE10 Promote the 
use of 
natural flood 
management 
techniques 
to maximise 
efficient 
resource use 
in Flood Risk 
Management The partner approach under the Flood Risk 
Management (Scotland) Act 2009 promotes 
the use of natural resources over man made 
solutions. This means finite resources are 
used more efficiently than they would have 
been in the past. This approach extends to 
multiple benefits, for example a pond would 
be bounded by natural structures as opposed 
to concrete solutions, and that is could bring 
an amenity benefit to the community over the 
flood attenuation function. Moreover, natural 
solutions have lower embodied carbon and, 
in some cases, can become carbon sinks.  Fife Council Scottish 
Water, 
developers, 
SEPA Other  Direct Ground-
work (2020-
22) Yes Yes  
RE11 Develop 
innovative 
water 
resource 
management 
solutions and Water resources need to be protected 
through the development of innovative water 
management solutions. This encompasses 
both water excess, in terms of flooding, and 
stress, in terms of drought. With the effects of 
climate change becoming more pronounced Fife Council Scottish 
Water, SEPA, 
Scottish 
Government, 
academia, Other  Policy Ground-
work (2020-
22) Yes Yes   
75 
 update 
Planning 
Guidance 
accordingly any flood mitigation solutions need to be 
considered for their effects on water stress, 
this is particularly applicable to feeding of 
water supply reservoirs and agricultural 
needs. Within Planning, this can include the 
development of better grey water systems 
and the stronger promotion of SuDS, 
installation of water meters and water 
efficient appliances and equipment within 
new buildings. Some of this work can be 
improved with closer working with third 
parties such as SEPA, Scottish Water, 
academia, developers and consultancy firms. developers, 
consultancy 
RE12 Development 
/ adoption of 
a LCA (life 
cycle 
assessment) 
carbon 
calculator to 
be used as 
part of 
procurement 
processes Public sector bodies’ procurement could be a 
considerable opportunity for decarbonising 
and reducing environmental impacts. When 
procuring assets which have the potential to 
have considerable embodied carbon or emit 
considerable carbon emission during 
transportation or their operating life – Fife 
Council will endeavour to estimate these 
emissions and for these high carbon 
procurement categories ensure that the 
embodied, transport and operating carbon 
emissions are considered in the procurement 
process and that low carbon options are 
prioritised. Fife Council Academia, 
consultancy Other  Policy, 
direct Ground-
work (2020-
22), 
Scaling-up 
(2023-25), Yes  Yes 
RE13 Monitor 
plastic 
pollution Fife Council will support community groups 
and regulators to monitor plastic pollution on 
Fife’s land and coastline; and will provide 
encouragement, support and publicity for 
community beach clean-ups. Community 
groups, SEPA Fife Council, 
community 
groups Other  Support Ground-
work (2020-
22), 
Scaling-up 
(2023-25),  Yes  
  
76 
  
ID Action  Description  Lead Partners BEI 
sector 12-
month 
action? Activity 
type Phase Alignment with vision  
  
   
CS01 Review of 
sequestration, 
reforestation 
and rewilding 
options Fife Council will undertake an urgent review to 
address the existing barriers to tree planting to 
significantly increase the number of trees 
within Fife over the next decade. The review 
should consider urban street trees as well as 
rural sites, and also identify vacant and 
derelict land that would be suitable for 
reforestation or other rewilding for use as a 
carbon sink, low carbon biomass growing, 
public open space and as part of a green 
infrastructure / climate adaptation plan. The 
plan will identify sensitive habitats and land to 
be protected from degradation to prevent it 
becoming a net emitter of greenhouse gases 
(i.e. peatland soils, saltmarsh).  Fife 
Council SNH, 
Forestry 
Commission 
Scotland, 
Woodland 
Trust, 
SEPA, 
Scottish 
Water Other Yes Policy Ground-
work 
(2020-22)  Yes Yes Yes 
CS02 Develop a 
land strategy 
to manage 
Council land 
assets In response to Action CS01 Fife Council will 
develop a land strategy (and costed plan) 
which will include how to best to use land 
resources to harness natural processes for 
absorbing emissions. This action forms part of 
Action LC05 above.   
 Fife 
Council SNH, 
Forestry 
Commission 
Scotland, 
SEPA, 
Scottish 
Water, 
Scottish Other Yes Policy Ground-
work 
(2020-22)  Yes Yes Yes 
 
77 
 Government
, community 
groups, 
charities and 
other large 
landowners 
within Fife.  
CS03 Woodland 
and habitat 
management  Implement a plan to sustainably manage  Fife 
woodlands held in public or common good 
ownership, including significant new woodland 
creation to absorb carbon emissions. Carry 
out any improvements as required to maintain 
the integrity of woodland, peatlands and 
saltmarsh to ensure that they continue to act 
as carbon stores, and do not become emitters 
of carbon dioxide because of habitat 
degradation.  Fife Coast 
and 
Countrysid
e Trust, 
Fife 
Council Forestry 
Commission 
Scotland, 
SNH, 
Woodland 
Trust, 
Scottish 
Government  Other  Direct, 
support All Yes Yes Yes 
CS04 Support and 
co-ordinate 
Fife wide 
carbon 
sequestration 
opportunities  In addition to developing a strategy for carbon 
sequestration on Fife Council land, Fife 
Council will help other community planning 
partners including the University of St 
Andrews to investigate their own opportunities 
for carbon sequestration (for example 
assessing the feasibility for flue gas capture). 
Fife Council will seek to engage other major 
landowners within Fife to encourage them to 
use their land in a way which maximises 
carbon storage. This will need to consider the 
best carbon storage planting options for Fife; 
how to incentivise landowners to protect 
sensitive habitats; to rewild and reforest 
appropriately; and how to encourage 
“greening” as a house building requirement 
and given that established trees are much 
more effective at storing carbon than saplings, 
this should consider how to prohibit or at least Fife 
Council SNH, 
Forestry 
Commission
, University 
of St 
Andrews, 
Scottish 
Water, 
Woodland 
Trust, 
landowners, 
developers 
Scottish 
Government
, FCCAN, 
community 
groups, Other  Support All Yes Yes Yes  
78 
 minimise, the removal of existing woodland 
and established trees for new development.  
CS05 Lobby 
government 
for additional 
funding and 
specialist 
technical 
support for 
carbon 
sequestration 
projects Carbon sequestration projects are a marked 
departure from traditional local authority areas 
of expertise. Many carbon sequestration 
projects will be innovative and will require 
piloting at scale. Additional revenue will be 
needed from Central Government to allow 
this. Fife 
Council  Scottish 
Government
, Other local 
authority 
partners,  Other Yes Direct Ground-
work 
(2020-22), 
Scaling-
up (2023-
25) Yes Yes Yes 
CS06 Fife wide 
carbon 
sequestration 
/ reforestation 
with Fife 
Actions under 
the Flood Risk 
Management 
(Scotland) Act 
2009 Fife Council have obligations under the Flood 
Risk Management (Scotland) Act 2009 to 
mitigate the effects of climate change on 
flooding, the impacts of which are felt across 
society and the environment. Any 
sequestration / reforestation / rewilding 
projects will report their findings to Structural 
Services for consideration of impacts on 
flooding, so that lessons can be learned. Fife 
Council Scottish 
Water, 
SEPA, 
developers, 
Forestry 
Commission 
Scotland, 
SNH, 
Woodland 
Trust, Other  Direct Ground-
work 
(2020-22), 
Scaling-
up (2023-
25) Yes Yes Yes 
CS07 Develop a 
carbon 
sequestration 
communicatio
n strategy Develop a communication strategy to increase 
understanding of carbon storage and rewilding 
– and highlight the environmental, social, soil 
health, biodiversity, health/wellbeing, 
economic, air quality and flood risk mitigation 
benefits. Use more accessible language when 
describing sequestration so people 
understand it and aren’t put off by it – perhaps 
use alternative terms such as “greening” or 
“carbon store”. This could be linked to a 
greening fund to encourage reforestation / 
rewilding projects and a register of community 
projects. This could include rewilding / 
sequestration roadshows to support Fife 
Environme
nt 
Partnershi
p (FEP) Fife Council, 
Forestry 
Commission 
Scotland, 
SNH, 
Woodland 
Trust, 
Greener 
Kirkcaldy, 
CLEAR 
Buckhaven 
& Methil, 
Sustainable 
Cupar, St Other  Yes Direct, 
support Ground-
work 
(2020-22),  Yes Yes Yes  
79 
 community tree planting and local growing 
initiatives. This action forms part of action 
IC05 above. Andrew’s 
Environment
al Network, 
 
 
ID Action  Description  Lead Partners BEI sector  12-month 
action? Activit
y type Phase Alignment with vision  
 
   
AD01 Produce and 
maintain a 
climate risk 
register The Council and its community planning 
partners will produce a formal climate risk 
register incorporating the findings of the Risk 
and Vulnerability Assessment undertaken by 
Climate Fife.  Fife 
Council Community 
planning 
partners, 
Local 
Resilience 
Partnership, 
Adaptation 
Scotland  Other  Policy, 
Direct Ground-
work 
(2020-22)  - Yes Yes 
AD02 Produce a 
detailed 
climate 
change 
adaptation 
action plan  This adaptation action plan is high level only, 
the next step is to work with local partners to 
identify priorities for adaptation action (using 
the results of the RVA), and to develop and 
implement adaptation projects to address 
these risks.  Fife 
Council SNH, SEPA, 
Community 
planning 
partners, 
Local 
Resilience 
Partnership, 
Adaptation 
Scotland, 
FCCAN, Other Yes Policy, 
Direct Ground-
work 
(2020-22)  - Yes Yes 
 
80 
 community 
groups 
AD03 Review of 
sequestration, 
reforestation 
and rewilding 
options and 
their role in 
adaptation  Fife Council will undertake an urgent review to 
address the existing barriers to tree planting to 
significantly increase the number of trees 
within Fife over the next decade as 
reforestation in the appropriate location is a 
vital tool in reducing flood risk. The review 
should also identify vacant and derelict land 
that would be suitable for us as part of a green 
infrastructure / climate adaptation plan. This 
action is tied to CS07 above.  Fife 
Council SNH, 
Forestry 
Commission 
Scotland, 
SEPA, 
Scottish 
Water Other Yes Policy Ground-
work 
(2020-22)  Yes Yes Yes 
AD04 Develop a 
land strategy 
to manage 
Council land 
assets In response to Action CS01 Fife Council will 
develop a land strategy (and costed plan) to 
address how to manage Fife Council land 
assets in a way that will best respond to the 
climate emergency. This will include using Fife 
Council owned land to adapt to climate 
change and to ensure food security in the 
future. This action is tied to action LC05 
above.    Fife 
Council SNH, 
Forestry 
Commission 
Scotland, 
SEPA, 
Scottish 
Water, 
Scottish 
Government
, NUF, Soil 
Association, 
Nourish 
Scotland, 
Permacultur
e Scotland, 
community 
groups, 
charities and 
other large 
landowners 
within Fife.  Other  Policy Ground-
work 
(2020-22)  Yes Yes Yes 
AD05 Use risk-
based Use best-practice risk-based approaches (i.e. 
for adaptation, vulnerability, etc) rather than Fife 
Council Academia, 
Adaptation 
Scotland,  Yes       
81 
 approach to 
target action just SIMD to prioritise where adaptation action 
is needed first. Local 
Resilience 
Partnership 
AD06 Support and 
co-ordinate 
Fife wide 
adaptation 
opportunities  A strong and healthy community is essential 
for resilience. Assist communities and 
community planning partners to build their 
own resilience to climate risks by supporting 
adaptation, local food, allotments, community 
energy, active travel, health and wellbeing and 
community cohesion projects.  Third 
sector, 
community 
groups Fife Council, 
Local 
Resilience 
Partnership  All  
Yes Support All - Yes Yes 
AD07 Produce and 
maintain an 
asset register 
of structures 
that Fife 
Council are 
responsible 
for which 
perform a 
flood defence 
function (both 
natural and 
manmade) Work with SEPA under Section 19 (SEPA to 
prepare maps of artificial structures and 
natural features) and Fife Council obligations 
under Section 60 (Flood Protection Schemes) 
and Section 62 / 63 (Registers of flood 
protection schemes) of the Flood Risk 
Management (Scotland) Act 2009. All of which 
consider ‘structures’ that perform a flood risk 
function at a point in time but should include 
the potential to be adapted to reflect the needs 
into the future. Fife 
Council SEPA Other  Direct 
and 
support All Yes Yes  
AD08 Push for a 
stronger 
national and 
local planning 
position with 
regards to 
development 
adjacent to / 
on the current 
functional 
floodplain. Fife Council will work with other local 
authorities to lobby Scottish Government and 
SEPA to produce a more precautionary 
approach to coastal flooding and the 
functional floodplain recognising that sea level 
rise could be more severe than currently 
mapped and that awareness / acceptance of 
the abandonment principle needs to be set 
now.  Fife 
Council SEPA, 
Adaptation 
Scotland, 
Scottish 
Government
, other local 
authorities Other Yes Policy Ground-
work 
(2020-22)  Yes   
82 
 AD09 Tree 
assessments Due to stormier conditions the health and 
structural integrity of trees along roads and 
near to houses will need to be assessed more 
frequently. As part of Street Tree and 
Woodland strategies, Fife Council will 
consider the most appropriate approach to 
tree assessment in the light of climate change 
impacts. This strategy will consider adaptation 
and sequestration. For example, if Fife 
Council owned trees are found to be unsafe 
and need to be felled then appropriate 
replanting would be recommended to ensure 
that biodiversity and carbon storage losses 
are minimised.  Fife 
Council SNH, 
Forestry 
Commission 
Scotland, 
Woodland 
Trust, 
landowners Other  Direct Scaling-up 
(2023-25)  Yes  
AD10 Lobby 
government to 
update 
Building 
Standards to 
increase 
resilience Fife Council recognises that the review cycle 
for Building Standards means that the current 
regulations are based on assumptions about 
weather and climate parameters that are now 
out of date. Building Standards must be 
updated to reflect the most recent science on 
the likely impacts of climate change in terms 
of wind loading, temperature and rainfall 
extremes. They should be updated to 
encourage the mainstreaming of adaptive 
measures such as urban greening (green 
roofs and walls), superinsulation, heavyweight 
construction, passive design, grey and 
rainwater recycling and considerable 
increases in drainage capacity and ability to 
withstand cloudburst events.  Fife 
Council Other local 
authorities, 
Scottish 
Government
, 
professional 
bodies Other Yes Support Ground-
work 
(2020-22) Yes Yes Yes 
AD11 Training and 
development 
sessions for 
decision 
makers on 
local climate 
risks and There is better understanding of climate 
change mitigation (i.e. cutting emissions) than 
climate change adaptation. It is vital that 
decision makers increase their understanding 
of climate risks and resilience building 
solutions. Workshops should be held to upskill 
decision makers and detailing the key risks by Fife 
Council Community 
Councils, 
Adaptation 
Scotland, 
Transition Other Yes Support Ground-
work 
(2020-22) Yes Yes Yes  
83 
 appropriate 
adaptation 
options area committee, and by Council service (with 
heads of service) with agreement on 
appropriate solutions to reduce risks and 
maximise opportunities.  network, 
FCCAN 
AD12 Community 
resilience 
building Fife communities will need to become more 
resilient to the physical impacts of climate 
change, but also potentially to food and 
energy supply disruption in the future. Working 
with partners Fife Council wants to understand 
what are the key factors that impact on 
vulnerability, and what factors are most 
important in increasing resilience. Fife Council 
will work with partners to consider existing 
examples from Transition Towns etc.  Fife 
Council will use tools from the Levenmouth 
Adapts project, which were developed in 
partnership with Adaptation Scotland, to 
inform the Local Community Planning 
process, ensuring adaptation is a 
consideration in the plans. Fife 
Council Community 
Councils, 
Adaptation 
Scotland, 
Transition 
network, 
FCCAN, 
community 
groups  Other Yes Support Ground-
work 
(2020-22) Yes Yes Yes 
AD13 Food security 
programme Fife Council will support local partners to 
develop a food-related programme of local 
projects to reduce Fife’s vulnerability to the 
international food supply chain disruption 
which is predicted to become more 
commonplace because of climate change. 
Projects within this theme of work should look 
at local low carbon food supply options and 
addressing food poverty vulnerability. We 
need to make more land available for food 
growing and more support for local 
organisations and residents to make this 
happen. 
Projects under this programme should include 
expanding allotment provision, community 
gardens, food cooperatives, food banks, 
community kitchens, reforestation using edible Community 
groups 
such as 
FCCAN, 
Greener 
Kirkcaldy, 
CLEAR 
Buckhaven 
& Methil, 
St 
Andrew’s 
Environme
ntal 
Network, 
Sustainabl
e Cupar, Fife Council, 
Community 
Councils, 
Adaptation 
Scotland, 
Transition 
network, 
Zero Waste 
Scotland, 
Soil 
Association, 
Permacultur
e bodies, 
Nourish 
Scotland, 
Permacultur
e Scotland Other Yes Support 
and 
direct All Yes Yes Yes  
84 
 tree species, food-growing education projects 
for all ages and should link to food waste 
minimisation efforts being carried out as part 
of the Zero Waste Fife and Love Food, Hate 
Waste campaigns.  
AD14 Displacement 
programme Review climate change displacement risks 
from long-term sea-level rise and other threats 
to Fife’s available land, to review these risks, 
and to actively manage land use with a view to 
reducing the need for future displacement of 
activity and population.  Fife 
Council Community 
Councils, 
Adaptation 
Scotland, 
Transition 
network, 
FCCAN, 
community 
groups, Fife 
Migrants 
Forum Other  Direct All Yes Yes Yes 
AD15 Use Fife’s 
coast and 
countryside 
assets to 
tackle climate 
change Fife Coast and Countryside Trust will continue 
to manage the Fife Coastal Path, Pilgrims 
Way and other coast and countryside assets 
for the benefit of Fifers and visitors in a way 
which will help respond to the climate crisis 
i.e. such as by including climate change 
adaptation, sequestration and mitigation. This 
action is tied to LC05 Fife Coast 
and 
Countrysid
e Trust Fife Council, 
SNH, SEPA, 
FCCAN, 
community 
groups Other  Direct  All Yes Yes Yes 
 