Climate Change
Strategy 
2022 
-
2030 
1 Climate Change StrategyContents 
Table of Figures 3 
Foreword 4 
Executive Summary 5 
The Climate Emergency 6 
How this strategy was developed 7 
Other Council Strategies that link to Climate Change Ambitions 8 
Flintshire County Council’s Carbon Footprint 9 
Baseline 10 Flintshire County Council’s Carbon Neutral Pathway 13 
Carbon Neutral Council by 2030 16 
Objective One – Buildings 17 
Objective Two – Mobility & Transport 18 
Objective Three – Procurement 19 
Objective Four – Land Use 20 
Objective Five – Behaviour 22 
Flintshire County’s Carbon Footprint 23 
How the Council can influence Flintshire County’s emissions 24 
Buildings: 25 Mobility & Transport: 26 
Land Use: 27 
Behaviour: 28 Financial Implications 29 
Challenges & Opportunities 30 
Measuring & Monitoring Impact 31 
Governance 32 Keeping others informed 33 
Appendix 1 - Glossary 34 
Appendix 2 - Action Plan to Net Zero Carbon 35 
“Climate 
change is not 
a small issue and 
should not be treated 
as one” Lydia, 
Argoed High 
2 Climate Change StrategyTable of Figures 
Figure 1: 
Flintshire County Council’s GHG emissions for 2018/19 baseline 10 
Figure 2: Flintshire County Council GHG emissions for 2018/19 baseline by emission source 12 
Figure 3: Flintshire County Council’s projected emissions to 2029/30 13 
Figure 4: Flintshire County Council Forecast Emissions 2018-2030 15 
Figure 5: Flintshire County Council Carbon Emission Milestones to 2030 15 
Figure 6: GHG emissions for Flintshire county 2005 - 2018 Department of Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy 23 
Figure 7: Breakdown of GHG emissions by individual sources for the period 2014-2018. LULUCF stands for land use, land use change and forestry and is the difference between what is absorbed by the land and what is emitted. 23 
Figure 8: Well-being of Future Generations Act well-being goals for Wales 
www
.gov.wales/well-being-of-future-generations-wales 30 
“The little 
things we do 
today can make a 
difference tomorrow” 
Luca, 8, 
Ysgol Wepre 
3 Climate Change Strategy       Strategy Foreword 
Welcome to this, the first climate change strategy the Council has 
prepared. 
We recognise that the climate crisis is a hugely important issue facing not 
just our residents, but the wider community, our environment and our wildlife. 
This strategy and action plan sets out our initial route map towards a net 
zero carbon Council by 2030; it’s a live document that will evolve as our understanding of how we can combat the impacts of climate change evolve. By working through these goals we will make a positive contribution to tackling climate change and support Welsh Government’s aim to be a net zero carbon nation by 2050. “Technology 
could help if they 
could make devices to 
get pollution out of the 
air and could come up 
with new ideas on climate 
change” Maddie, 
Argoed High 
The adoption and publication of this strategy comes as we emerge from a global pandemic which has changed behaviours in our day to day life. During the pandemic we have worked together to protect one another and ourselves in a time of critical need, this need is replicated in the climate change strategy. 
We can only achieve the aims of net zero carbon by engaging and working with our residents, communities and 
businesses. Some of our communities face challenges that we can help to ease by reducing fuel poverty, promoting green spaces for wellbeing, and developing green skills and job opportunities. 
Flintshire County Council has invested in energy reduction measures and renewable energy schemes for a number of 
years, and this strategy sets the scene for our future aspirations in tackling climate change and to create a more resilient and net zero carbon Flintshire. 
Neal Cockerton Chief Executive Flintshire County Council 
4 Climate Change Strategy 
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
 
 
   
 Executive Summary 
1.1 The climate is changing and while it has always changed through natural environmental processes, it is now widely 
accepted that human activity is affecting the climate on a scale that is having detrimental effects on all living things. The Paris Climate Change Agreement 2015 recognised the need to accelerate actions and invest to reduce impacts on the environment
1. If we do nothing, the potential implications will be detrimental to our communities through risk 
to health and well-being, flooding, extreme heat, disruption to infrastructures in energy, transport and industry. 
1.2 The Council supports the declarations made by Welsh Government for the Public Sector to become carbon neutral by 2030
2, and in Dec 2019 the Cabinet Members approved a motion to develop a clear Climate Change strategy 
which will set key aims and actions for creating a carbon neutral organisation. 
1.3 The Council was responsible for greenhouse gas emissions of 46,434 tCO2e 
in 2018/2019 from the services it delivers, the buildings it operates and the goods/services it purchases. There are a number of actions the Council can take to reduce its organisational greenhouse gas emissions and this document sets out the Council’s first step goals and actions to become a net zero carbon organisation. 
1.4 The theme objectives centre around buildings, mobility and transport, procurement, land use and behaviour. The actions identified within each of these themes have had input from Members, the public, and Council employees in order to deliver a pathway that is both ambitious and achievable with the right investment, resource, collaboration and leadership. 
1.5 External funding will be available for carbon reduction projects, but the expectation is that capital and revenue investment will be necessary to realise this ambition. Further development of the Programme’s action plan will estimate the level of investment needed for the interventions described and businesses cases for individual investment projects will be developed to demonstrate the potential financial savings both short and long term. 
1.6 Adopting all current cost-effective or technically viable options to reduce carbon is unlikely to enable us to reach net-zero emissions by 2030, leaving an estimated 40% gap. These low-carbon measures may not yet be commonly available or cost or carbon effective; therefore it is vital that we are kept abreast of advances in technology and methodology. 
1.7 To bridge the gap between emissions and net zero carbon, offsetting measures such as tree planting will be necessary, while also supporting the quality and range of biodiversity and implementing natural flood risk measures. The Council will need to determine its approach to this prioritisation within its land assets. 
1.8 The Council recognises it has a contribution to make towards the ‘Team Wales’ target
3 of a net zero public sector 
and therefore will use the learnings from the first two years of this strategy to re-inform further actions, bridge the gap to net-zero, and address the successes and failures in emissions reductions. The net zero target for the public sector will be on a ‘Team Wales’ basis meaning carbon positive organisations will balance with residual emissions of other Public Bodies, but this does not remove the Council’s responsibility to plan for net zero. 
1.9 The impacts of climate change are already upon us, and it is vital that future thinking is developed to consider climate change adaptation within flood risk, building construction, access to green space, the travel network and increasing local green skills. 
1United Nations (2015), The Paris Agreement. https://www.un.org/en/climatechange/paris-agreement 
2 Welsh Government (2019), Prosperity for All: A Low Carbon Wales. https://gov.wales/low-carbon-delivery-plan 
3 Welsh Government (2020), Team Wales approach to tackle climate change.  
  https://gov.wales/team-wales-approach-tackle-climate-change 
5 Climate Change Strategy  
         
  The Climate Emergency 
2.1  Global  heating is expected to generate significant sea level rises and more frequent 
and heavy extreme weather effects. The actual impacts of the climate crisis can 
already be seen in terms of storms, flash flooding and drought, causing water damage, surface water drainage issues, and destruction of aged green spaces resulting in increased maintenance of roads, buildings, flood defences and loss of ancient woodland. This threatens human life, as well as access to adequate energy, water, food and housing as essential human requirements for effective health, wellbeing and future resilience. A more heated and unstable climate also affects the natural environment and is a risk to the health and diversity of wildlife and ecosystems. 
2.2   There is now unprecedented political recognition of the global Climate Emergency. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change detailed the need to limit the increase in global temperature to 1.5oC above pre-industrial levels in order to prevent 
 a public health catastrophe
4. This is currently predicted to occur between 2030 and 2052 if the 
 current rate of change continues. 
2.3   The signing of the Paris Climate Change Agreement by 189 countries legally-bound their commitment to act to limit global temperature rise
5.  The Climate Change Act 2008 gives specific targets around carbon reduction for the 
UK. Climate Change (Wales) Regulations 2021 proposes further increases to Wales’ climate targets in response to recommendations from Climate Change Committee (CCC) with interim targets and a final net zero nation by 2050
6. 
2.4  In 2019, the W elsh Government declared a Climate Emergency in Wales, accepting the recommendations from the 
UK Committee on Climate Change and further setting ambitious plans for the public sector to be carbon neutral 
by 2030. ‘Prosperity for All: A Low Carbon Wales’7 sets out Welsh Government’s approach to cutting carbon 
emissions and the recent document ‘Welsh Public Sector Net Zero Carbon Reporting Guide’ details the principles and priorities for the reporting approach for the public sector. 
2.5  Ther e are a number of different Greenhouse Gasses (GHG) that affect global warming and in order to use a single 
number to ‘group’ these gases, they are converted into equivalent amounts of carbon dioxide – often seen as CO2e. 
2.6  As  we are already experiencing the effects of climate change it is important that we look proactively to adapt to these 
impacts by adopting future thinking. This applies to the design and materials used in buildings, flood investigation and mitigation, renewable energy generation, access to green spaces and protection of the natural environment. 
2.7  On 30 June 2021 the W elsh Parliament further declared a nature emergency following research showing how fragile 
many species and ecosystems are due to habitat loss, pollution, invasive non-native species and climate change. 
This called for statutory targets to be set to stop and reverse any decline in biodiversity
8. 
2.8  The  Council has been committed to reducing carbon emissions and managing and enhancing biodiversity for some 
time, however the importance of the link between climate change and nature recovery brings this work to the fore 
and therefore both areas must work together to reduce the impact we are having on our planet. 
4 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (2020), Special Report – Global Warming of 1.5C. https://www.ipcc.ch/sr15/ 
5 United Nations (2015), The Paris Agreement. https://www.un.org/en/climatechange/paris-agreement 
 6 Welsh Government (2021), Climate Change Wales Regulations 2021. https://gov.wales/climate-change-wales-regulations-
2021-integrated-impact-assessment-html#section-62452 
7 Welsh Government (2019), Prosperity for All: A Low Carbon Wales. https://gov.wales/low-carbon-delivery-plan  
8 Cynnal Cymru (2021), Wales declares nature emergency.. https://cynnalcymru.com/wales-declares-nature-emergency/ 
6 Climate Change StrategyHow this strategy was developed 
3.1  Flintshire County Council supports the declarations made by Welsh Government and in Dec 2019 its Elected 
Members approved a motion to develop a clear Climate Change strategy which will set key aims and actions for 
creating a carbon neutral organisation. 
3.2  During 2020 and 2021, the Council performed a number of engagement workshops with Members and Officers, 
identifying accomplishments made within carbon reduction, and proposals for future ideas to reach the net zero carbon goals. 
3.3  In line with Welsh Government guide ‘Net Zero Carbon Status by 2030: A route map for decarbonisation across 
the Welsh Public Sector’ the plan is split into four themes of Buildings, Mobility & Transport, Procurement and Land Use
9. It was agreed to incorporate a fifth theme of Behaviour which will integrate within the other themes through 
communication, engagement, instruction and training. 
3.4  The Council ran a public engagement period through October and November 2021 which described the work 
carried out to date in each of the themes and asked for feedback on the proposed next steps to achieve net zero carbon by 2030. During this period an engagement activity was also carried out with primary and secondary schools. This activity asked our young people to write a letter to their future selves about the world in 50 years and what they hope has been achieved in that time. A selection of excerpts from these letters are included throughout this strategy. 
3.5  The feedback from this engagement period was further developed in internal workshops with each of the portfolio 
areas across the Council’s services. This was supported by both the Climate Change Programme Board and Officer Group where scenario planning explored changes in both policy and process to deliver on our aims. 
3.6  The scope identified within this strategy focusses on the changes and impacts that can be made directly by the 
Council to reduce both its own emissions and those of the wider county. The strategy is portioned with objectives and actions to reduce our direct carbon emissions, and then actions to reduce our wider emissions and those of the wider county. 
3.7  It is clear that further progress in reductions can only be achieved through support and engagement of both the 
wider community and Welsh and UK governments. 
3.8 The strategy was then presented to Cabinet Members in February 2022 for adoption.
9 Welsh Government (2021), Net Zero Carbon Status 2030: Public Sector Route Map. https://gov.wales/net-zero-carbon-status-
2030-public-sector-route-map 
“In 2001 Wales’ 
recycling rate was only 
7% but by 2020 this was 
65% so I hope that people 
keep recycling as much as 
possible to keep this 
going up.” Aled, 10, 
Ysgol Croes Atti 
7 Climate Change StrategyOther Council Strategies that link to 
Climate Change Ambitions 
-  The Council aims to deliver a policy-led approach that incorporates the Well-being of Future Generations (Wales) Act 
2015 and Environment (Wales) Act 2016. 
- The Council’s Corporate Plan outlines key priorities across its services. 
- Renewable Energy 10 year Action Plan 
- Air Quality Management Plan 
- Biodiversity and Ecosystem Resilience Duty Delivery Plan (Sec 6 Environment (Wales) Act 2016) 
- Urban Tree and Woodland Plan 
- Local Development Plan 
- Procurement Strategy 
- Fleet Strategy 
- Integrated Transport Strategy 
- North Wales Joint Local Transport Plan 
- Waste Management Strategy 
- Housing Strategy & Action Plan 
- Digital Strategy 
- Clwydian Range and Dee Valley AONB Management Plan 
- Active Travel Plan 
- 21st Century Schools Investment Programme 
“At school we 
could combat climate 
change by recycling 
paper and plastic, 
reuse materials, use 
solar panels or wind 
energy.” Emily, 
Ysgol Glan Aber 
8 Climate Change Strategy  
  
  
  
  
           
 Flintshire County Council’s 
Carbon Footprint 
5.1 Flintshire County Council has, over a number of years, committed to the 
reduction of carbon emissions through proactive carbon reduction strategies. 
During this period, approximately 60% of the Council’s carbon emissions from energy sources have been reduced through proactive programmes including conversion of street lighting to LED, utilising energy efficiency measures across its assets, and leading the way with renewable energy schemes such as solar and methane capture. 
5.2 The Council now identifies that this strategy needs to be widened to encompass all carbon emissions from the Council’s assets and services and has therefore committed to become net zero carbon by 2030. This will look to decarbonise Council operations and promote the protection and enhancement of the county’s natural environment. Following the link between the decline in nature and climate change it is important that the climate change strategy includes the protection of our ecology and biodiversity. “Fun Fact: 
if all of the trees 
die and disappear 
the world will fall apart 
because the tree roots 
are holding the world 
together.” Kelsy, 
Ysgol Glan Aber 
5.3 The Council’s Cabinet Members approved a motion to develop a clear Climate Change strategy which will set key aims and actions for creating a carbon neutral organisation. 
5.4 While the Council is committed to significantly reduce its carbon footprint, it recognises that however carbon efficient its assets and services become, there will still be a residual footprint of carbon that cannot be eliminated. Due to this, the carbon that cannot be removed must be compensated for through generation of renewable energy and carbon offsetting by, for example, tree planting. By generating renewable energy that is then utilised by the Council, we can reduce emissions associated with using energy from the grid. 
5.5 The scale and scope of this strategy is informed by a number of key constraints including: wider financial constraints, COVID-19 recovery, changes in Government policy and planning policy, and funding availability e.g. Feed In Tariffs and Green Deal finance. More changes will emerge and it is vital for the Council to remain informed of emerging policy and financial change to support the wider climate change agenda. This strategy sets out the key actions that will impact out next steps in carbon reduction. The strategy will be reviewed in 2024/25 to review learnings, address successes and failures and adjust actions in line with emerging technologies and methodologies. 
5.6 Achieving the aspirational targets set out in this strategy will require the Council 
to work with neighbouring Councils, Welsh government, other public sector 
organisations, Universities, local businesses and voluntary and community 
groups to work in partnership. The Council calls upon these stakeholders 
to collaborate with us to capitalise on opportunities and resources, in 
order to maximise our collective efforts to minimise greenhouse gas 
emissions from Flintshire. Only through working together can we achieve the required reduction in emissions needed to avert dangerous levels of climate change and achieve net zero carbon as a wider-nation 
by 2050. The Council has already shown leadership in partnership with 
development of Parc Adfer waste to energy facility, and continues to 
work closely with North Wales Economic Ambition Board, Public Service 
Board and others. 
9 Climate Change Strategy  
   
  
      
  
    
  
 
         Baseline 
6.1 Everything we do has an effect on the environment we live in; from burning fossil fuels for heating to collecting kerbside waste and recycling. Flintshire County Council reports its carbon footprint to Welsh Government as tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (tCO2e) within its organisational and operational boundaries. This plan relates to the Council’s internal operations which are: 
- Buildings owned and operated by the Council including offices, depots, schools, community centres, care 
homes, public conveniences and street lighting. This includes heating, electricity and water use within these facilities. 
- Fleet vehicles owned by the Council, - Business travel for work, - Employee commuting, - Procurement of goods and services. 
6.2 The scope excludes: - Domestic properties, - Buildings owned by us that are leased out and operated by third parties, 
6.3 In order to establish where we are and where we need to be, we first need to look at our baseline figures. In 2018/19 we were able to capture the data set out below. Figure 1 below shows a breakdown of GHG emissions by emission source for 2018/19
10. 
Flintshire County Council’s greenhouse gas emissions (tCO2e) for 2018/19 
Employee commuting 
Fleet 
Supply chain 
Business travel-rail 
Business travel-car 
Water supply & treatment 
Electricity in streetlighting 
Electricity in buildings 
Heating for buildings 2,409 
3,418 
28,970 
4 
884 
217 
1,277 
3,735 
5,517 
0 5,000 10,000 15,000 20,000 25,000 30,000 35,000 
10 It should be noted that the data has been collected using the best available methods at that time, and therefore the expectancy is 
   that data accuracy will improve with emerging methodologies. 
10 Climate Change Strategy 
 
    
  
  
 
  
  
 
  
   Baseline 
6.4 As these figures suggest, the biggest contributors to the Council’s carbon footprint in 2018/19 were: 
- Supply chain; procurement of goods and services: 62% -Heating for buildings: 12% 
-Electricity in buildings: 8% 
- Fleet: 7% -Employee commuting: 5%
11 
6.5 The Council produced 1,664 tonnes of waste in 2018-19 from its operations, however all waste collected by the Council, including operational waste, was either recycled or sent to energy from waste plants for incineration when it cannot be recycled. All green waste is composted. Therefore the only carbon emissions related to waste are included in the ‘Fleet’ data through waste collection vehicles. 
6.6 Supply chain; procurement of goods and services equates to 62% of our baseline carbon emissions total. The 
Council understands that there are actions that can be taken to reduce these emissions through decision making processes and supplier engagement, however this figure will only see significant reductions if the appropriate investment, policy and infrastructure is provided and developed by the Government. 
6.7 From this data we understand that our baseline carbon emissions for 2018/19 were 46,434 tCO2e. 
6.8 In 2018/19, the Council reported an estimated 1,500 tCO2e absorbed from its land assets. However, this figure has been estimated based on two specific land types – grassland and woodland/forest – with a common value factor used to determine the absorption of carbon. As yet, no formal baseline figures have been calculated for our land assets to determine more accurate absorption figures and therefore this action is a priority in realizing the true benefits of our land to both carbon sequestration and wider habitat richness. 
6.9 The 2018/19 carbon absorption total can be removed from our emissions total as a ‘carbon offset’. Therefore to meet our net zero carbon goal, the total carbon emitted by the Council, minus the total carbon absorbed from Council owned and operated land, must equal zero by 2030. In 2018/19 the balance of carbon emissions was 
44,934 tCO2e. 
6.10 The Council now has carbon emission data for three financial years as shown in Figure 2 below. The total carbon emissions for 2019/20 saw a 1% reduction on the 2018/19 baseline. The total carbon emissions for 2020/21 saw a 17% reduction on the 2018/19 baseline. This is further to the reductions already made within the former carbon reduction strategy 2009 – 2021. 
11 Note this data has a high level of inaccuracy due to the calculation methodology used 
“Even though 
we have renewable 
  energy sources most of 
the power stations in the 
UK use coal, oil and gas 
which result in global 
warming” Emily, 13, 
Argoed High 
11 Climate Change Strategy  
  
     50,000 
45,000 40,000 35,000 30,000 tCO2e 25,000 20,000 15,000 10,000 
5,000 
0 
2018/19 2019/20 2020/21 
Heating for buildings Electricity in buildings Electricity in streetlighting 
Water supply & treatment Business travel - car Business travel - rail 
Supply chain Fleet Employee commuting 
Figure 2: Flintshire County Council GHG emissions for 2018/19 baseline by emission source   
 
 
 
 
 Baseline 
6.11 Emissions reductions in 2020/21 were made across most sources but most significantly within mobility and travel, 
electricity in buildings and electricity in street lighting. The former are the result of changes in work pattern due to the global COVID-19 pandemic. The latter is a result of change of use and investment in energy efficiency measures in buildings and the recent conversion of street lighting to low energy LEDs. 
Greenhouse Gas Emissions for Flintshire County Council by emission source 
12 Climate Change Strategy50,000 
45,000 40,000 35,000 
Emission tCO2e30,000 25,000 20,000 15,000 10,000 
5,000 
0 reduction of 
18.000 tCO
2e 
Gap to net zero 20.000 tCO
2e 2018/19
2019/202020/212021/222022/232023/242024/252025/262026/272027/282028/292029/30 Figure 3: Flintshire County Council’s projected emissions to 2029/30 
Actual data 
Business as usual Decarbonisation pathway Net zero pathway   
 
        
  
 
  
  Flintshire County Council’s 
Carbon Neutral Pathway 
7.1 Flintshire County Council’s emissions pathway has been mapped out between 2018 and 2030 demonstrating: 
- Business as Usual (BAU) - the expected emissions should no further action be taken to decarbonise. -Decarbonisation Pathway – a targeted decarbonisation scenario based on the actions detailed within this Strategy. 
- Net zero – a best case scenario decarbonisation path if resources were unlimited, to show the gap to net zero for 
the Council. 
Flintshire County Council 2018-2030 Emissions 
7.2 The reduction in emissions for 2020/21 were fairly significant and due to accelerated change in response to the COVID-19 global pandemic. The changes made were already in plan but travel and social restrictions advanced these so that business operations and services could still deliver. The Council is confident that the reduction in emissions can largely be maintained but the accelerated reduction in 2020/21 will be difficult to maintain over the 8 year duration to 2030. 
7.3 Figure 3 shows the decarbonisation pathway of predicted emission reductions based on delivery of the actions within this strategy. When compared to a Business As Usual scenario where no changes are made we could see an 18,000 tCO2e reduction in emissions by achieving the aims within. The objectives and actions described in the next section have potential to fulfil this reduction in emissions. 
13 Climate Change Strategy  
  
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
 Flintshire County Council’s 
Carbon Neutral Pathway 
7.4 However, this still leaves a 20,000 tCO2e gap to zero by 2030. These remaining emissions will mainly come from: 
-Buildings that are not suitable for retrofit of energy efficiency measures or renewable energy and therefore retain a higher energy consumption. 
- Employee commuting / business travel where using non-fleet vehicles that are not ultra-low emissions. - Supply chain; procurement of goods and services. 
7.5 Some of this gap can be filled by utilising carbon offsetting to absorb and store carbon so investment in this area is crucial. 
7.6 The current methodology to determine emissions from supply chain/procurement is based on the value of goods/ services. Due to this, for as long as we are spending money within specific ‘higher carbon’ areas, the assumption is that our emissions are relative to the value of those spends. This makes reductions of emissions from supply chain difficult to accurately quantify and difficult to manage. 
7.7 There are actions that we can take to improve emissions from supply chain/procurement – for example weighting tendering processes based on lower carbon emissions (local supply/low energy construction or delivery). However, significant change can only come from this area with improved emissions methodologies that better represent real emissions and better legislation/regulation/investment in local green skills. Due to this, and the fast developing changes in climate change best practice, we can only effectively plan up to three years ahead. In 2024/25 the decarbonisation pathway will be reviewed in light of these changes. 
7.8   The four themes identified within Welsh Government’s ‘Net Zero Carbon 
decarbonisation across the Welsh Public Sector’ are Buildings, Mobility & TransLand Use has a negative impact as it absorbs carbon dioxide and is thereforeincluded in the following charts. 
  12 Welsh Government (2021), Net Zero Carbon Status 2030: Public Sector Route Map. 
    https://gov.wales/net-zero-carbon-status-2030-public-sector-route-map Status by 
2030: A route map for 
port, Procurement and Land Use12. 
 not 
“In Wales 
we have lots 
of nice scenery 
and parks, which 
are full of wildlife”  
Ava, 9, Northop 
Hall CP 
14 Climate Change Strategy  
             50,000 
45,000 40,000 35,000 30,000 25,000 20,000 15,000 10,000 
5,000 
0 
Buildings 
Mobility & Transport Procurement 
2018/19 2019/20 2020/21 2021/22 2022/23 2023/24 2024/25 2025/26 2026/27 2027/28 2028/29 2029/30 
Figure 4: Flintshire County Council’s forecast emissions 2018-2030  
    
    
    
     
    A Baseline tCO2e Reduction 
Theme 2018/29 2020/21 2024/25 2029/30 
Buildings 10,747 8% 35% 60% 
Mobility & Transport 6,716 49% 50% 80% 
Procurement 28,970 12% 30% 60% 
Figure 5: Flintshire County Council’s carbon emission milestones to 2030   Flintshire County Council’s 
Carbon Neutral Pathway 
7.9 Based on reductions from 2018-21, and considering the impacts of actions detailed within this strategy that we 
can deliver in coming years, we estimate that carbon reduction in each of the themes will look as per Figure 4. This demonstrates the predicted balance of emissions remaining within each theme – most significantly Procurement. 
Flintshire County Council 2018-2030 Emissions 
7.10 Figure 5 below shows where we are now and the milestones we hope to reach between now and 2030. We are currently aiming for a 60% emission reduction in Buildings, 80% emission reduction in Mobility & Transport and 60% reduction in Procurement. 
7.11 To achieve these milestones we will set interim targets in each theme which will allow us to identify success and ar
eas that need additional attention. 
15 Climate Change Strategy  
     
 
 Net Zero Carbon by 2030 
Buildings: 60% 
reduction in emissions 
by 2030 and 
adaptation measures Mobility & Transport: 
80% reduction in 
emissions by 2030 Procurement: 60% 
reduction in 
emissions by 2030 Land Use: increase 
carbon absorption and 
maintain biodiversity 
l   Cut emissions from 
heating and electricity 
in new and existing Council buildings 
l   Design buildings for net zero carbon, adaptation and biodiversity 
l   Investigation and alleviation of floods 
l   Invest in renewables l   Convert fleet to electric/ alternative fuels 
l   Invest in electric charging infrastructure 
l   Deliver employee schemes in cycles and ultra low emission vehicles 
l   Support agile working practices l   Ensure carbon is included throughout the procurement process 
l   Work with our suppliers to develop carbon 
neutral working practices l   Calculate accurate baselines for carbon absorption and habitat richness are achieved 
l   Further develop carbon absorption and enhancement of habitats 
l   Further develop renewable energy opportunities 
Behaviour: climate change is considered in all decision making. 
Members and employees are trained and aware of their responsibilities Carbon Neutral Council by 2030 
8.1 The Council has identified aims within each of the key objective themes. Each of these objectives has a number 
of wide-ranging actions. The reduction aims are based on the 2018/19 baselines for each theme. 
8.2 Given the scale, complexity and urgency of responding to climate change, it is proposed that the ‘Action Plan’ is seen as something that is iterative in natur 
e. While setting out the medium to long term roadmap to carbon 
neutrality, it is also likely that an annual update will be needed, to capture the rapid changes being delivered under the Action Plan, and to ensure it is reflective of the likely rapidly changing national and international context. 
16 Climate Change Strategy  
 
  
 
   
  
 
     
  
 
  
 
  
  
 
  
 
    
   
  
   
 
Objective One Buildings 
9.1 In 2018/19, Council owned buildings produced 10,747 tCO2e. These emissions came 
from direct burning of fossil fuels for heat, electricity and water use in buildings and energy used to power street lights. Since 2009 a number of programmes have been completed to reduce these emissions from our offices, schools, leisure centres and care facilities. However to achieve carbon neutrality we need to reduce the emissions even further while also considering the impacts of buildings on biodiversity. 
9.2 To achieve our 60% emissions reduction in buildings by 2030 we will aim for 9% reduction each year to 2029/30. 
9.3 Progress to date: -In 2009 the Council developed a carbon reduction strategy to reduce emissions from energy related carbon by 60% by 2021. This strategy saw the delivery of many effective and innovative projects across the county including: 
-Installation of low carbon and renewable energy systems in over 50 of the Council’s buildings including offices, schools and leisure centres. Technologies include solar PV, solar thermal, wind turbines, heat pumps, biomass boilers and combined heat and power. 
- Non domestic energy generation systems met approximately 10% of the Council’s energy demand in 2018-19. - Investment in innovative technologies such as transpired solar collectors and battery storage. - Delivery of an annual programme of energy efficiency measures, such as building fabric insulation, draught proofing, 
new boilers, new heating controls, lighting upgrades etc in the Council’s non domestic buildings since 2008. 
-Investment and delivery of energy efficiency improvements in Council housing through the Welsh Housing Quality Standard and Welsh Government/UK Government schemes such as NEST, Arbed, Warm Homes Fund and Eco (including improvements of private households). 
- Rationalisation of Council estate moving employees to a modern, more energy efficient building in Ewloe. -Building and renovating fit for future schools through the 21st Century Schools Programme, with new school buildings funded through this programme required to be Net Zero Carbon. 
- Replacement of the Council’s streetlighting with LED lamps which use significantly less electricity. -Installation of low carbon and renewable energy systems in its own housing since 2009 including solar PV, ground and air source heat pumps and battery storage. There are now over 700 homes with solar PV and the Council was one of the first authorities to trial the combination of air sour ce heat pumps, solar PV and battery storage. 
-The Council saw further reductions from building emissions during 2020/21’s COVID-19 pandemic where building occupancy and services were reduced to protect local communities. 
9.4 Future actions -The Council acknowledges that return of services and investment in some areas, e.g. EV charging infrastructure, will increase our demand for energy and therefore further investment around renewable energy generation is necessary within our buildings and assets and land use. 
We will: - Ensure all Council buildings and schools (excluding housing) are included in a green energy tariff by 2025. - Further review the rationalisation of our building assets and leases in reflection of our new ways of working. -Improve the standard of energy efficiency in our existing buildings and engage with building users to encourage positive behaviour change. 
-Design and refurbish buildings for carbon neutral / low energy operation, biodiversity net benefit and adaptation to the impacts of climate change. 
- Support schools to reduce operation’s emissions. -Ensure green infrastructure is considered throughout all existing Council assets and future schemes, e.g. allocation of green space, green roofs, habitat creation. 
-Continue to carry out flood investigation and alleviation to identify proactive mitigation measures & prevent recurrent flooding 
- Prioritise nature based solutions to flooding remediation proposals - Explore feasibility for rainwater harvesting within Council assets, particularly on high water usage sites. 
Further measures of success and timescales can be found in Appendix 2 
17 Climate Change Strategy  
  
 
 
  
 
   
 
     
 
  
 
    
 Objective Two Mobility & Transport 
10.1 Reducing emissions from Council owned fleet, business travel and employee commuting. Emissions from mobility 
& transport remain a consistent source of carbon emissions with 14% of total emissions being reported in 2018/19. We know that technologies around electricity and hydrogen fuelled vehicles is improving and we need to ensure that we do not fall behind in this area. 
10.2 To achieve our 80% emissions reduction by 2030 we aim to reduce our emissions by 9% each year to 2024/25 and then increase to 10% per year up to 2029/30. 
10.3 Progress to date: -The Council’s fleet meets the Euro 6 standard and therefore has the lowest emissions possible for diesel vehicles. 
-Delivery of safer routes in the community schemes around schools, encouraging children with their families to walk and cycle to school offering improved road safety, reduced air pollution and congestion whilst also improving peoples’ physical and mental health. 
- Developed community based transport options when commercial bus services have been withdrawn. - Developed and delivered active travel routes across the County. -These projects have helped to reduce our carbon emissions from mobility and transport by 49% in 2020/21 compared to 2018/19 baseline. We anticipate that our emissions could increase with the reintroduction of services across the county and therefore are committing to a variety of actions. 
10.4 Future actions: 
We will: - Complete the review of the current fleet contract to fulfil transition to ultra-low emission vehicles (ULEV). - Review fleet policy with consideration for charging of vehicles. -Learning from accelerated change due to COVID-19, review and implement policies and initiatives that support the reduction of carbon emissions from business mileage. Continue to implement and develop agile working practices to reduce employee journeys and utilise virtual meetings. 
- Trial two electric recycling vehicles from early 2022. -Introducing two electric buses to serve local travel arrangement in Buckley and the Deeside Industrial Park & Ride facility on Zone 2. 
- Ensure vehicle charging points are available at key areas across the county - rural and urban. - Transition fleet vehicles to electric and alternative fuels (hydrogen, etc) - Facilitate a car sharing forum for employees – once measures post-COVID-19 are reviewed -Actively promote the existing employee cycle to work scheme to increase participation and review cycle storage facilities at principle work places 
- Promote and launch a managed salary sacrifice scheme for low and ultra-low emission vehicles. 
Further measures of success and timescales can be found in Appendix 2 
“There are many 
things I could do to be 
more energy efficient. Maybe 
I could turn the heating off 
and wear a coat. If I live close to 
my work I could walk or bike it, 
if I don’t need a light on I could 
turn it off. At school, litter pick, 
reuse materials and don’t be 
wasteful.” Chloe, 
Ysgol Glan Aber 
18 Climate Change Strategy  
  
 
 
      
 
 
  
      
  
 
   Objective Three Procurement 
11.1 Current estimates by Welsh Government show that 60 - 81% of Public Sector organisations’ operating budgets are 
spent with Suppliers and Contractors. Flintshire County Council’s own emissions from procurement represented 62% of total emissions in 2018/19. This has seen a 12% reduction in 2020/21 against the 2018/19 baseline. Due to this, the Goods, Services and Works provided by our Suppliers and Contractors emits a significant percentage of the carbon we generate. 
11.2 This makes decarbonisation within the Council’s commissioning, procurement and contract management processes 
a key player in influencing and reducing our emissions – however, there is an acceptance that external factors largely affect this and therefore we have reduced the target emissions reduction for this theme. 
11.3 To achieve our 60% emissions reduction by 2030 we aim to reduce our emissions by 8% each year up to 2029/30. 
11.4 Progress to date: -The Council has a strong methodology established through our own TOMs (Themes, Outcomes & Measures) framework which uses social, economic and environmental factors within procurement operations. 
-Joint procurement service with Denbighshire County Council which allows collaboration to maximise cost and efficiency savings. 
-Review of Joint Social Value Procurement Strategy to provide consistency and ensure social, economic and environmental factors are not compromised. 
11.5 Future actions: 
We will: -Review of procurement strategy in line with the Council’s carbon ambitions to ensure specific measures around carbon and biodiversity are embedded in procurement process. 
-Ensure carbon reduction is appropriately considered throughout Council procurement policy, strategy, business cases, commissioning templates, tender evaluations, etc. 
-Increase the utilisation of the TOMs (Themes, Outcomes and Measures) framework in procurement across the Council’s operations by working with employees who manage procurement activities 
-Work collaboratively with Denbighshire County Council to develop a toolkit to ensure all procurement exercises are awarded giving appropriate consideration to carbon reduction priorities and provide communication and training to all affected employees and suppliers 
- Enable best practice for carbon offsetting schemes providing local 
place-based environmental outcomes, where required 
- Support the local economy where possible - Work in collaboration where procurement of goods and services can be 
utilised on a regional or joint basis 
Further measures of success and timescales can be found in Appendix 2 
“In the future 
I think villages and 
towns will have expanded 
in size but have less 
shops around because of 
the internet” Emily, 13, 
Argoed High “Do you 
remember when we 
were in lockdown for the 
pandemic and no-one 
was allowed to go out 
and the air pollution went 
down a lot!” Molly, 
Argoed High 
19 Climate Change Strategy 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
  
  
    
  
 
 
 Objective Four Land Use 
12.1 We aim to increase carbon absorption and maintain biodiversity within our land assets. 
12.2 The Council can utilise our land to support our carbon and biodiversity aims. We 
can do this through investment in renewable energy and planting schemes to support carbon absorption and improvement and maintenance of our biodiversity. The Council has worked on large scale projects to increase our renewable energy generation, however in order to reach our ambitious goals of decarbonisation more large scale projects will need to be developed. 
12.3 It is unlikely that the Council will be able to reduce its annual GHG emissions to 1500 tCO2e by 2030 (our current annual sequestration rate for our existing land assets). Therefore, once all opportunities to reduce GHG emissions have been completed/ exhausted the Council will need to increase the annual amount of carbon sequestered “I live on a 
beautiful planet full 
of life. Right now our 
world is in danger to be 
changed forever and it 
needs EVERYONE’s 
help.” Elin, 
Ysgol Wepre 
in its land assets. This does not remove the Council’s responsibility to aim for net zero carbon. 
12.4 Progress to date: 
-Own and operate two landfill gas engines which generate low carbon electricity and are now complemented by 
two solar farms. These power on site facilities as well as the nearby waste transfer station. 
- The construction of an additional two solar farms, with a combined generation capacity of 3.5MW. -The trial of different grass cutting regimes on the Council’s verges and green spaces to encourage and enhance biodiversity. 
-Development of a 15 year Urban Tree and Woodland Plan with the target of achieving 18% urban canopy cover by 2033. Objectives of the plan are to increase the amount of tree planting by specifically targeting urban areas with low canopy cover, ensuring existing canopy cover is managed sustainably, promoting biodiversity and working in partnership. The Council has been working with Community Groups, Natural Resources Wales and schools - planting trees in education and public land. 
-Publishing of our “Supporting nature in Flintshire” biodiversity duty plan and are working to support biodiversity protection and improvement in Flintshire. 
-Working with hundreds of businesses, volunteers, charities, schools and other organisations, across the region of North Wales, Shropshire and Cheshire removing litter from the banks and tributaries of the River Dee. 
-Countryside Services manages over 40 sites of natural greenspace including Wepre Park and Greenfield Valley 
Heritage Park, 1,200 km public rights of way, 60 km of Welsh Coastal Path, events 
and education programmes, and brings in external grants of over £400k per year 
connecting people to nature. 
-The Council has protected our 120 play areas and invested over £2m in 
partnership with town and community councils over the last 8 years as 
well as ensuring free open access to greenspace. 
-Through collaboration with regional partners and Welsh Government, the Council has managed the construction of an energy from waste facility, Parc Adfer, which will create electricity for 30,000 homes from waste that cannot be recycled. It will also help to prevent waste from going to landfill. 
-Through the same partnership all of the Council’s food waste is taken to an anaerobic digester where it is used to produce electricity (via biogas) and liquid fertilizer, preventing food waste from going to landfill. 
-All green waste is developed into compost at the Greenfield Waste Transfer 
Station. 
20 Climate Change Strategy 
 
   
   
    
   
   
    
      
 Objective Four Land Use 
12.5 Future actions: 
We will: 
- Identify current carbon storage capacity within Council assets through mapping habitat types -Investigate the potential of our land assets for new renewable energy installations and operating models and develop these schemes to increase the amount of energy generated from these sources 
-Undertake a study identifying land for habitat restoration and tree planting schemes within land assets to mitigate climate change and enhance biodiversity 
-Audit the amount of herbicide and pesticide use on Council land assets 
- Increase proportion of Council land managed for biodiversity - Support the increase of tree canopy cover across the county in line with the Urban Tree and Woodland Plan. -Assess impacts of Ash Dieback and tree planting within Flintshire assets on canopy cover and net carbon sequestration 
- Increase area with reduced mowing regimes to enhance biodiversity and increase carbon storage - Strengthen the monitoring of sustainable drainage systems (SuDs) installation and quality in new developments. -Explore best practice policies and encourage provision of space for food growing in new developments and vacant and under used sites 
-Review and improve recycling provision in Council offices, schools and public buildings and remove use of single-use plastics. Communicate and engage building users to utilise provision 
-Support circular economy initiatives diverting reusable items from disposal through recovery at Household Recycling Centres 
-Create guidelines for Council procurement of food in offices, schools, etc, to be local and sustainable 
Further measures of success and timescales can be found in Appendix 2 
“My home 
because the hill might 
erode by being close 
to the sea..” 
Larissa, 
Ysgol Glan Aber “My home 
might look different 
because the hill might 
erode by being close 
to the sea..”  
Larissa, 
Ysgol Glan Aber 
21 Climate Change Strategy  
  
 
   
 
  
 
 Objective Five Behaviour 
13.1 Climate change is a behavioural change programme. Behavioural change is a large part of climate action and the 
success of both the Council’s and the wider nation’s climate ambitions hangs on all of our actions. Communication and engagement is key for ensuring the ambitions set out in this strategy are embedded within the Council’s culture and ethos. 
LEAD 
In our own operations ENABLE 
A low carbon region with 
our programmes, policies 
and decisions INSPIRE 
Businesses and residents 
to take climate action 
themsleves 
UNDERPINNED BY A STRONG STRATEGY 
13.2 Supporting Council services to adapt to the impacts of climate change and decline in nature We will: - Ensure climate change and biodiversity is considered a priority in decision making across all Council services -Ensure Councillors and employees complete carbon literacy / introduction to climate change / biodiversity training. Inclusion of climate change within induction process. 
- Engage employees and Trade Unions to renew job descriptions to include climate change responsibilities -Facilitate transition towards a ‘paperless Council’ through, for example, digitisation of wage slips, report packs, contracts, applications, etc. 
-Facilitate corporate volunteering for climate and biodiversity action 
Further measures of success and timescales can be found in Appendix 2 
22 Climate Change Strategy   
   
   
   
      kilotonnes (kt) of CO2 2,000 
1,800 1,600 
Figure 7: Breakdown 
of GHG emissions by individual sources for 1,400 
1,200 
the period 2014-2018.1,000 LULUCF stands for land 
800 use, land use change 
600 and forestry and is the 
400 difference between what 
is absorbed by the land and what is emitted. 200 
0 
Industry & commercial electricity Industry & commercial gas Large industrial installations 
Industrial & commercial other fuels Agricultural combustion Domestic electricity 
Domestic gas Domestic other fuels Road transport (A roads) 
Road transport (minor roads) Diesel Railways Transport other 
LULUCF net emissions 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2,600 
2,400 Emissions kt CO2e2,200 2,000 1,800 1,600 1,400 1,200 
Figure 6: GHG 
emissions for Flintshire county 2005 - 2018, Department of BUsiness, Energy & Industrial Strategy 2005
2006200720082009201020112012201320142015201620172018   
  
 
  Flintshire County’s Carbon Footprint 
Flintshire county GHG Emissions 
14.1 Flintshire county has seen an overall reduction in GHG emissions since 2005 as shown in Figure 6. The emissions 
during this time have had periods of increase specifically around 2011/12 and 2017/18. 
14.2 Figure 7 provides a further breakdown of the emission sources that contribute to the County’s overall GHG emissions fr 
om 2014-201813. Largest contributors to this footprint are large industrial installations and road transport. There 
are significant industrial areas in the county including Deeside, and the heavily used coast road also runs the length of the county. 
14.3 Flintshire County Council is responsible for approximately 3% of the County’s GHG emissions. 
13 Most recent year data is available from Department of Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy 
23 Climate Change Strategy  
 
  
   How the Council can influence  
Flintshire County’s emissions 
14.4 There are a number of actions that can be taken by the Council to reduce GHG emissions from the wider county. 
Through its leadership role, the Council can steer and influence as well as inspire individual and collective action and responsibility. Many actions such as rolling out electric vehicle charging infrastructure require a joined up, common approach which can only be brought about through joint working across boundaries. 
14.5 However, collaboration and partnership working will be vital as many GHG emission sources lie outside of the Council’s control and will therefore require cross sector input. 
NET ZERO 
Cut emissions from: 
Buildings 
Fleet 
Business travel 
Staff commuting 
Waste 
Procurement Sequester carbon 
through: 
New plantings Better 
management of: 
Woodlands 
Peatlands 
Parklands Influence others to 
bring about change 
across the county of 
Flintshire REDUCE ABSORB INSPIRE 
14.6 These are the actions within the key themes that do not contribute to our direct carbon footprint but that we can 
deliver in order to engage, influence and empower others. 
24 Climate Change Strategy 
   Buildings 
Reducing energy consumption and emissions from homes and businesses in Flintshire by promoting energy efficiency 
measures, sustainable construction, renewable energy source, and behaviour change. 
-Develop plans for the decarbonisation of Council homes in line with Welsh Government guidance to ensure optimised 
thermal efficiency and minimised cost of heating 
-Support Town & Community Councils to reduce operation’s emissions and engage with our building users to encourage positive behaviour change 
-Continue to deliver programmes with private households and local businesses to reduce fuel poverty and provide access to wider energy efficiency and renewable energy schemes. 
-Provide support through Flood Risk Planning to businesses and households to better implement property flood resilience 
“I wonder if in 
the future my house 
will still have an oil tank 
outside powering the 
boiler or whether we “Me and my 
will have solar panels?” friends protested 
Maia, Ysgol in school and we 
Bryn Coch made posters to hold 
up about saving the 
world.” Eavan, 
Ysgol Penarlag 
25 Climate Change Strategy“To help the climate 
I am making changes to my 
daily routine. Starting now this is 
what I am going to do to help: I will 
start simple by being careful with hot water. 
After I will turn down the heating by 1 or 2. If 
there is a short distance, I will not drive I will 
walk. When it is cold, I will put on an extra layer. 
I will not waste Plastic I will recycle instead. I will 
use wooden straws not plastic. I will spend my “how are the 
money smartly. I shall use LED bulbs. I will also beaches for you, plant some trees and vegetables. I will not have people stopped waste paper. I will not eat as much meat. littering or is there now a Next to no food waste. Finally I will keep
magical robot that picks the house warm by shutting doors” 
up everyone’s rubbish Callum, 9, 
Northop Hall CP off the floor.” Amy, 9, 
Ysgol Penarlag Mobility & Transport 
- Reducing emissions from transport by promoting sustainable transport, reducing car travel and traffic congestion, and 
encouraging behaviour change 
- Promote use of public transport, active travel, and further develop the Council’s walking and cycling network 
-Promote multi-modal transport journeys and the development of strategic transport hubs. Improve access to storage, charging and hiring facilities. 
- Investigate further opportunities for reducing car use with consideration for local contexts and accessibility through 
ultra-low emission areas, car free zones and pedestrianised streets. 
- Work with partners to enable greener fleet in the public transport sector (buses, rail, taxis) including Council contracted 
services such as school transport 
26 Climate Change Strategy 
    Land Use 
- Supporting other landowners and the community to utilise green spaces and maximise carbon absorption. 
- Work with Tenant farmers to share best practice on sustainable farming and increasing carbon absorption -Explore best practice policies and encourage provision of space for community food growing in new developments and vacant and under used sites 
-Undertake a land use strategy to ensure land is managed and protected for green infrastructure, decarbonisation and biodiversity benefit. 
-Work with Tenant farmers to share best practice on sustainable farming, increasing carbon absorption and biodiversity value. 
-Work with communities to increase biodiversity value and carbon storage 
- Identify opportunities to acquire new Council land for the purpose of carbon sequestration and biodiversity enhancement 
“Don’t make 
the mistakes I made 
like throwing food away. 
Get solar panels, try 
vegan food, buy clothes 
from charity shops” 
Oliver, Ysgol 
Merllyn “I hope the seas 
have stopped rising, the 
world has not flooded and sea 
creatures are ok. There is a lot of 
plastic in the ocean at the moment 
and I hope that has been cleaned 
up and more biodegradable plastic 
has been made. My school is pretty 
efficient – they are planting more 
trees and doing more work on 
computers so we use less 
paper” Riley, 8, 
Ysgol Wepre 
27 Climate Change Strategy Behaviour 
- Supporting Council services, residents and businesses to adapt to the impacts of climate change 
-Investigate the possibility of divesting pensions and other investment portfolios away from fossil fuels in support of green energy. 
- Facilitate community events and activities to raise awareness of climate change and how to reduce carbon footprints. 
“I am on the 
school council so I 
can persuade our schools 
to plant more wildflowers 
and trees to attract 
more bees – bees are so “As I write this important for our planet’s world population has 
ecosystem!” Beatrix, 8, gone up 76%, cars on 
Ysgol Wepre the road have gone up 
225%, air passengers 
have gone up 575%.” 
Aled, 10, Ysgol 
Croes Atti 
28 Climate Change Strategy  
  
  
  
  
  
  Financial Implications 
19.1 Flintshire County Council has invested greatly in carbon reduction over the last ten years and around £2.5 million 
has been invested in energy efficiency and renewable energy programmes through the interest free Salix invest-to-save programme. This investment, and the ongoing rationalisation of assets and agile working are producing financial and carbon savings in times of increasing energy prices. 
19.2 Many Councils are under severe financial pressure with funding cuts over a sustained period reducing capacity for investment. However significant investment will be required if the Council is to achieve its goal of becoming net zero carbon by 2030. It is likely that resources will need to be diverted and increased to deliver on our ambition. 
19.3 To deliver this strategy over the next 3 years it could cost several million with further investment needed up to 2030 and beyond. Some investment will be required through both capital and revenue to deliver on this ambition, however it should be noted that it is not expected that finance will be provided by the Council alone. External funding will be available from both Welsh and UK governments as well as other external bodies, but some capital funding will require match funding. These funding streams will need to be fully maximised to ensure net zero carbon is achieved. Restructuring of internal funds/budgets and use of prudential borrowing will be required to fund other projects. 
19.4 Several actions within this strategy, for example pilot EV charging, already have committed funding either internally or from external sources such as Welsh Government. Energy related projects may be eligible for the Welsh Government Wales Funding Programme which offers 0% interest free loans to the public sector for energy efficiency and renewable energy projects. It may be that some of the proposed projects can be tied in with existing work streams, however additional capacity is likely to be required. 
19.5 Further development of the Programme’s action plan will estimate the level of investment needed for the interventions 
described and businesses cases for individual investment projects will be developed to demonstrate the potential financial savings both short and long term. 
19.6 Capital: Business cases (and larger investment/capital decisions) will be developed as appropriate to support 
investment in decarbonisation and / or carbon sequestration activities. 
Revenue: There is a recognition that project management support will be necessary to drive our move towards 
carbon neutrality. Business cases will also identify revenue implications. 
29 Climate Change Strategy  
  
  
 Challenges & Opportunities 
21.1 All sectors will need to work collectively to achieve climate change ambitions. This will require significant change in 
the way that we do things and the way we make decisions. It requires leadership at many levels and consultation both internally and with communities and businesses. General consumption will need to be reduced, land managed to better absorb carbon, longer-term planning of building homes to be adaptable to the changing climate and designing roads and transport infrastructure that is resilient to weather changes. Difficult decisions will need to be made, that are not always popular, so that we can ensure a prosperous and sustainable society for the future. 
21.2 There are multiple benefits to the Council’s net zero aims including health benefits due to cleaner air, warmer homes, increased walking and cycling and healthier diets. The local economy can grossly benefit from the investment in local energy and new green industries improving employment rates and social and financial deprivation. This will contribute towards the Council Wellbeing objectives ‘An Ambitious Council’ and ‘A Caring Council’ as well as the Well-being goals under the Well-being of Future Generations (Wales) Act 2015
14. 
A Globally
Responsible
Wales A 
Prosperous
Wales 
A 
Resilient 
Wales 
A 
Healthier 
Wales 
A 
More Equal
Wales A Wales 
of Cohesive 
Communities A Wales 
of Vibrant 
Culture and 
Thriving
Welsh 
Language 
Figure 8: Well-being of Future Generations Act well-being goals for Wales. www.gov.wales/well-being-of-future-generations-wales 
21.3 Flintshire County council will engage with the Government to call for increased commitment and resource to support the transition to net zero carbon. While there are actions that the Council can take to reduce its emissions; new legislation, regulation, policy and finance is required from the Government to reform to a carbon neutral society. 
14 Welsh Government (2015), Well Being of Future Generations (Wales) Act. (2015). http://www.legislation.gov.uk/anaw/2015/2/ 
contents/enacted 
30 Climate Change Strategy  
  
 
  
    
 
 Measuring & Monitoring Impact 
22.1 It will be crucial that the Council monitors and evaluates its progress to achieve the targets set out in this 
strategy. Therefore the Council commits to: -Measure and report carbon emissions from the Council’s estate and activities each year to Welsh Government as part of its ‘Welsh Public Sector Greenhouse Gas Reporting’. 
- Publish performance and progress against targets annually. -Continue to strengthen the accuracy of data collection through identification of gaps in process and emerging best practice. 
-Continue to develop climate change actions and delivery plans through continued engagement internally and externally. 
-Review the whole climate change strategy in 2024/25 to assess progress and areas for improvement, and align targets within the key priority areas. 
“Me and my family 
walk to school and back 
(as much as we can) to reduce 
polluting the atmosphere. We also 
turn lights off when we leave rooms 
(my sister doesn’t). However, we 
sometimes leave the TV on for a bit 
when we are not watching it, even 
though we know we shouldn’t. This is 
something we are working on.” 
Hannah, 9, 
Ewloe Green CP “I undoubtedly 
hope that by the time 
you are reading this, the 
state of the world has changed 
due to activists, protests and 
people’s knowledge increasing 
about climate change. At this 
current period, our world is being 
destroyed, ruined and demolished 
each day and we need to take 
account for our actions” 
Lydia, Argoed High 
31 Climate Change Strategy  
    
   Governance 
23.1 The climate change strategy will be delivered as a programme of activities that is coordinated and managed centrally 
but has the input and involvement of all Council service areas and external partners. 
23.2 Political steer for this programme will come from Cllr Derek Butler as Lead Member for Environment & Economy and Cllr Sean Bibby as Lead Member for the Climate Change Programme. 
23.3 Programme progress will be monitored by the Climate Change Programme Board which is made up of representatives from each political party. This Board will be supported by Officer Groups for each theme with representation from each of the stakeholder portfolios. Progress reports will be received by the Environment & Economy Scrutiny Committee to deliver further development of the plan. Scrutiny of the programme is also available from Internal Audit as appropriate. 
23.4 Key performance measures will be included in the Council Plan performance report. 
“Instead of 
throwing old things 
away I will start taking 
them to the charity shop so 
other children can reuse my old 
toys. Maybe my school could 
provide us with some recycling 
and we could make lots of “In our 
things for a day.” schools I think 
Izzy, 10, we will teach 
Ysgol Bryn Coch kids how to grow 
food/veg.” 
Daniel,10,Ysgol 
Croes Atti 
32 Climate Change Strategy  
  Keeping Others Informed 
24.1 We are currently developing both internal and external web pages specific to the climate change programme and 
the Council’s progress in this area. This website will also include information and links to other sites to encourage individuals and organisations to calculate their carbon footprint and reduce their carbon emissions. 
24.2 We are also developing a periodic news bulletin and you can opt in and out of this service by emailing direct to climatechange@flintshire.gov.uk 
“I think the 
world will be flooded 
in 2071, half of the 
world’s animals have 
probably died, hundreds 
of beaches closed 
because of the plastic “We can 
recycle paper so overflowing them” that trees don’t have Kuba, to be chopped down and Ysgol Merllyn recycle plastic so it doesn’t 
have to be dumped in 
the clear sparkling 
ocean” Olivia, 
Ysgol Merllyn 
33 Climate Change Strategy 
 Appendix 1 Glossary 
Biodiversity: The variety of plant and animal life that make up our natural world or a particular habitat. 
Carbon Dioxide Equivalent (CO2e): the equivalent amount of carbon dioxide that would produce the same amount of 
global warming over a 100 year timescale. Carbon Store: the amount of carbon stored in the natural environment such as soil, woodland, peatland etc. These may 
also be described as carbon sinks. 
Climate Change Adaptation: Actions to help organisations and communities to prepare for the impacts of climate 
change. 
Climate Change Mitigation: Actions to help reduce greenhouse gas emissions and therefore help to prevent further 
climate change. 
Council assets: buildings and land owned by Flintshire County Council. Decarbonisation: reducing the carbon intensity and greenhouse gas emissions of an activity or service or wider 
organization. 
Direct Emissions: Emissions of greenhouse gases into the atmosphere from sources that are owned or controlled by an 
organization such as burning natural gas in boilers, burning petrol in owned company vehicles etc. 
Green Infrastructure: A catch-all term to describe the network of natural and semi-natural features within and between 
our villages, towns and cities. These features range in scale, from street trees, green roofs and private gardens through to parks, rivers and woodlands. At the larger scale, wetlands, forests and agricultural land are all captured by the term. 
Indirect Emissions: Emissions of greenhouse gases that are a consequence of the activities of the organization but 
occur at sources owned/controlled by another organization. Lifecycle assessment: This is a cradle-to-grave or cradle-to-cradle analysis technique to assess environmental impacts 
associated with all the stages of a product’s life, which is from raw material extraction through materials processing, manufacture, distribution, us and disposal. 
Net Zero Carbon: Emissions of greenhouse gases are balanced by the removal of greenhouse gases from the atmosphere 
such as by trees, peatland and carbon capture and storage technologies. 
Offsetting: A reduction in GHG emissions (e.g. wind turbines replacing coal) or an increase in carbon storage/GHG 
removal enhancement (tree planting, peatland restoration) outside of the GHG emissions boundary of an organisation that is used to compensate GHG emissions occurring within the organisation’s boundary. 
Scope 1/2/3: Used to delineate direct and indirect emission sources to improve transparency and provide utility for 
organisations and climate policies. Scope 1 refers to direct greenhouse gas emissions from sources owned or controlled 
by the organization. Scope 2 refers to indirect greenhouse gas emissions produced from the electricity used by an organization. Scope 3 refers to all other indirect greenhouse gas emissions produced from the activities of an organization. 
Sequestration: Removing carbon dioxide from the atmosphere and then storing it, usually through environmental 
processes such as photosynthesis, absorption by soil, oceans etc. Welsh Public Sector Net Zero Carbon reporting guide: In response to Welsh Government’s target of a carbon 
neutral public sector by 2030 a new Welsh GHG emissions reporting system has been developed whereby public sector organisations will report their GHG emissions annually to Welsh Government. Detailed guidance has been provided to support organisations in their calculations. 
34       
     
      
   
        
           
     
    
   
   
 
  
     
     
     
             
    
    
      
     
   
    
 
        
   
  
   
      
     
     
   
     Climate Change Strategy 
Appendix 2 Action Plan to Net Zero Carbon 
Climate Change Programme Action Plan 
Ref. Theme Action Measures of success Action Owner Target start date Expected duration 
CCBu1 All Council buildings and schools electricity % electricity supply from green tariff Energy Unit, 2022 2 years 
delivered through a green energy tariff by 2025 Valuation & Estates 
CCBu2 Review and rationalise building assets and Rationalised assets with potential reduction in Valuation & Estates 2022 Ongoing programme 
leases considering new ways of working emissions from energy use in under-used assets. 
CCBu3 Improve the standard of energy efficiency within % reduction in emissions from energy use in Property Design & 2022 Ongoing programme 
Council buildings through retrofit measures such buildings. Maintenance, Energy 
as; insulation, glazing, installation of efficient / % reduction in emissions from electricity Unit, Education 
renewable heating systems, and reducing use in buildings. & Youth 
building electricity use. 
CCBu4 Further explore renewable energy opportunities % energy generated and supplied to FCC from Energy Unit, 2022-23 Ongoing programme s for Council buildings, council office car parks its own renewable generation assets Valuation & Estates gand depots 
CCBu5 Design and refurbish buildings for carbon neutral Specification and standard drawn and utilised. Property Design & 2022 Ongoing programme Buildin/ low energy operation, biodiversity net benefit Maintenance, Energy 
and adaptation to the impacts of climate change. Unit, Education & Youth 
CCBu6 Ensure green infrastructure is considered No. of green infrastructure schemes Property Design & 2022 Ongoing programme 
throughout all existing Council assets and future Maintenance, 
schemes Natural Environment 
CCBu7 Continue to carry out flood investigation and No. of flooding incidents prevented Flood Risk Planning, Ongoing Ongoing 
alleviation to identify proactive mitigation No. of flood measures completed Streetscene 
measures & prevent recurrent flooding 
CCBu8 Prioritise nature based solutions to flooding No. of nature based schemes Streetscene, Natural Ongoing Ongoing programme 
remediation proposals Environment 
CCBu9 Explore feasibility for rainwater harvesting within % decrease in water use from the mains source Property Design & 2023 5 years 
Council assets, particularly on high water usage Maintenance, 
sites. Energy Unit 
35       
     
    
   
      
      
   
     
 
     
   
  
   
   
     
     
  
    Climate Change Strategy 
Appendix 2 Action Plan to Net Zero Carbon 
Climate Change Programme Action Plan 
Ongoing programme 
Ongoing programme Ongoing Ongoing programme Ref. Theme Action Measures of success Action Owner Target start date Expected duration 
CCBu10 Support schools and Town & Community % of schools and Town & Community Councils Energy Unit, 2022 
Councils to reduce operation’s emissions and with carbon reduction plans. Economic Devel-
engage with our building users to encourage opment, Climate 
positive behaviour change Change 
CCBu11 Develop plan for the decarbonisation of Council Decarbonisation strategy and action plan Housing Assets, 2022 
homes in line with Welsh Government guidance completed and implemented. Property Design 
to ensure optimised thermal efficiency and No. of houses improved & Maintenance 
minimised cost of heating 
CCBu12 Continue to deliver programmes with private No. of households receiving energy efficiency Economic Ongoing 
households and local businesses to reduce fuel support Development 
poverty and provide access to wider energy No. of businesses that have been supported to 
efficiency and renewable energy schemes. reduce their carbon footprint 
CCBu13 
gs 
Provide support through Flood Risk Planning to No. of businesses supported Flood Risk Planning 2024 n
businesses and households to better implement No. of households supported Buildiproperty flood resilience 
36       
     
  
   
     
   
  
   
 
   
      
     
     
       
     
     
     
      
  
 
  
     
     
  
       Ref. Theme Action Measures of success Action Owner Target start date Expected duration 
CCM1 Review fleet policy with consideration for charging of vehicles. Reviewed Fleet Policy Fleet Services 2022 1 year 
CCM2 
t Learning from accelerated change due to COVID-19, review and implement policies and initiatives that support the reduction of carbon emissions from business mileage. Continue to implement and develop agile working practices to reduce employee journeys and utilise virtual meetings. Act as an example to businesses. Reviewed policies. Maintained levels of carbon emissions from business mileage and employee commuting HR, Fleet Services,Council-wide  2022-23 Ongoing programme 
CCM3 
or
Ensure vehicle charging points are available at key areas across the county - rural and urban. No. of EV charging points across county – corporate and public Transport, Streetscene 2022 Ongoing programme 
CCM4 
ansp r Introduce electric vehicles into the recycling fleet % of electric vehicles in recycling fleet Fleet Services 2022 2 years 
CCM5 
 & TTransition of small fleet vehicles to electric and alternative fuels (hydrogen, etc) % of fleet vehicles using low carbon fuel types Fleet Services 2023-24 3 years 
CCM6 Transition of heavy vehicles to electric or alternative fuels (hydrogen, etc) % of fleet vehicles using low carbon fuel types Fleet Services 2027 3 years 
CCM7 
MobilityFacilitate a car sharing forum for employees – once measures post COVID-19 are reviewed. % of employees car sharing 
% reduction in carbon emissions from business mileage % reduction in carbon emissions from employee 
commuting HR Post-Covid Ongoing programme 
CCM8 Actively promote the existing employee cycle to 
work scheme to increase participation and review cycle storage facilities at principle work places (i.e. County Hall, Mold, County Offices, Flint, Ty Dewi Sant and Alltami Depot) Increase in participation levels (number of employees) HR 2022 Ongoing programme Climate Change Strategy 
Appendix 2 Action Plan to Net Zero Carbon 
Climate Change Programme Action Plan 
37       
     
     
     
    
    
   
      
   
 
  
     
  
      
     
   
  
  
 Climate Change Strategy 
Appendix 2 Action Plan to Net Zero Carbon 
Climate Change Programme Action Plan 
Ongoing programme 
3 years 
Ongoing programme 
Ongoing programme Ongoing programme Ref. Theme Action Measures of success Action Owner Target start date Expected duration 
CCM9 Promote and launch a managed salary sacrifice Number of employees taking up scheme HR 2022 
scheme for low and ultra-low emission vehicles. 
CCM10 Promote use of public transport, active travel, No. of active travel schemes undertaken Active Travel, 2022 
and further develop the Council’s walking and Communications, 
cycling network Access Team 
CCM11 Promote multi-modal transport journeys and the No. of transport hubs Transport, 2022 t development of strategic transport hubs. No. of active travel related assets available Streetscene r Improve access to storage, charging and hiring 
facilities. 
CCM12 
anspoInvestigate further opportunities for reducing car No. of car use reduction schemes undertaken Regeneration 2023 
use with consideration for local contexts and accessibility through ultra-low emission areas, r Tcar free zones and pedestrianised streets. 
CCM13 
Mobility & Work with partners to enable greener fleet in the % increase in number of low emission vehicles Transport, key 2023 
public transport sector (buses, rail, taxis) in public transport partners 
including Council contracted services such as % reduction in carbon emissions from public 
school transport transport
38  Ref.  Theme  Action  Measures of success  Action Owner  Target start date Expected duration 
 CCP1 Review of procurement strategy in line with the   Reviewed strategy  Procurement  2022  1 year  
 Council’s carbon ambitions to ensure specific 
 measures around carbon and biodiversity are 
 embedded in procurement process. 
    
 CCP2 Increase the utilisation of the TOMs (Themes,   % of employees receiving support Procurement,   2022-23 2 years 
 Outcomes and Measures) framework in   % increase of procurement activities using Social Value 
 procurement across the Council’s operations   TOMs framework 
 by working with employees who manage 
 procurement activities 
 
 CCP3 
t Work collaboratively with Denbighshire County   Toolkit developed and utilised. Procurement,   2022-23 2 years 
 
n Council to develop a toolkit to ensure all   % of procurement activities using toolkit Climate Change 
 
eprocurement exercises are awarded giving  % reduction in carbon emissions from supply chain 
 
emappropriate consideration to carbon reduction 
 priorities and monitor contract against declared 
 
remissions. Provide communication and training 
 to all affected employees suppliers and 
 
ocu prospective bidders. 
 CCP5 
Pr Enable carbon offsetting best practice schemes  No. of schemes completed  Procurement,   2022-23 2 years 
 providing local place-based environmental   Social Value, 
  outcomes, where required   Climate Change     
 CCP6 Ensure carbon reduction is appropriately   No. of Council documents/processes reviewed  Procurement  2022-23 2 years 
 considered throughout Council procurement   to consider carbon reduction 
 policy, strategy, business cases, commissioning 
  templates, tender evaluations, etc.    
 CCP7 Increase local participation and stakeholder   No. of businesses supported Procurement,   2022-23 Ongoing programme 
  involvement by working with local businesses to  Social Value 
 ensure decarbonisation and social value 
  outcomes are achieved    
 
 Climate Change Strategy 
Appendix 2 Action Plan to Net Zero Carbon 
Climate Change Programme Action Plan 
39 Climate Change Strategy 
Appendix 2 Action Plan to Net Zero Carbon 
Climate Change Programme Action Plan 
 Ref.  Theme  Action  Measures of success  Action Owner  Target start date Expected duration 
 CCP8 
  Work in collaboration where procurement of  goods and services can be utilised on a regional  
 or joint basis  No. of regional/joint procurement activities   Procurement,  Key partners   2022-23 
  Ongoing programme 
 
 
Procurement 
40       
     
      
       
   
 
      
       
      
      
  
     
       
       
     
       
   
   
   
     
      
         
      
     
  Climate Change Strategy 
Appendix 2 Action Plan to Net Zero Carbon 
Climate Change Programme Action Plan 
Ref. Theme Action Measures of success Action Owner Target start date Expected duration 
CCL1 Identify current carbon storage capacity within Baseline map and data of carbon storage Climate Change, 2022-23 3 years 
Council assets through mapping habitat types Natural Environment 
CCL2 Investigate the potential of our land assets for % energy utilised by FCC from its own large Valuation & Estates, 2022 Ongoing programme 
new renewable energy installations and scale renewable energy schemes Energy Unit 
operating models and develop these schemes to increase the amount of energy generated from these sources 
CCL3 Undertake a study identifying land for habitat Study complete Natural Environment 2022-23 Ongoing programme 
restoration and tree planting schemes within land assets to mitigate climate change and Land Use enhance biodiversity 
CCL4 Audit the amount of herbicide and pesticide Rationalise use and review alternatives Natural Environment 2023 1 year 
use on Council land assets 
CCL5 Increase proportion of Council land managed % Area increase in land managed for biodiversity Valuation & Estates, Ongoing Ongoing programme 
for biodiversity Natural Environment 
CCL6 Support the increase of tree canopy cover % Canopy cover Valuation & Estates, Ongoing Ongoing programme 
across the county in line with the Urban Tree No. of trees planted Property Design & 
and Woodland Plan. New areas allocated for natural regeneration Maintenance, Education & Youth, Natural Environment 
CCL7 Assess impacts of Ash Dieback and tree planting No. of trees planted Natural Environment Ongoing Ongoing programme 
within Flintshire assets on canopy cover and net carbon sequestration 
CCL8 Increase area with reduced mowing regimes to % area increase 
Natural Environment, Ongoing Ongoing programme 
enhance biodiversity and increase carbon storage Streetscene 
41       
      
  
     
            
 
      
     
     
  
     
   
     
   
         
     
     
 
        
    
  
      
   
     
  
 Climate Change Strategy 
Appendix 2 Action Plan to Net Zero Carbon 
Climate Change Programme Action Plan 
Ref. Theme Action Measures of success Action Owner Target start date Expected duration 
CCL9 Strengthen the monitoring of sustainable % of appropriate new development with SuDs Planning Strategy Ongoing Ongoing programme 
drainage systems (SuDs) installation and quality in new developments. 
CCL10 Explore best practice policies and encourage % of appropriate area available for food growing Valuation & Estates 2023 Ongoing programme 
provision of space for food growing in new developments and vacant and under used sites 
CCL11 Review and improve recycling provision in % of waste reused, recycled or composted Waste services 2022-23 2 years 
Council offices, schools and public buildings and remove use of single-use plastics. Communicate and engage building users to utilise provision 
CCL12 
Land Use Support circular economy initiatives diverting No. of items recovered and upcycled 
reusable items from disposal through recovery No. of repair and reuse centres Waste services Ongoing Ongoing Programme 
at Household Recycling Centres 
CCL13 Create guidelines for Council procurement of Guidelines developed and communicated. Procurement 2025 1 year 
food in offices, schools, etc, to be local and sustainable 
CCL14 Undertake a land use strategy to ensure land is Strategy developed and adopted Valuation & Estates, 2023 2 years 
managed and protected for green infrastructure, LDP monitoring Natural Environment, 
decarbonisation and biodiversity benefit. Planning Policy 
CCL15 Work with Tenant farmers to share best practice % of Tenant farmers supported Valuation & Estates, 2023 2 years 
on sustainable farming, increasing carbon Natural Environment 
absorption and biodiversity value. 
CCL16 Work with communities to increase biodiversity No. of schemes supported Natural Environment Ongoing Ongoing programme 
value and carbon storage. 
CCL17 Identify opportunities to acquire new Council Area of land acquired for carbon sequestration Valuation & Estates 2023-24 Ongoing programme 
land for the purpose of carbon sequestration and biodiversity enhancement 
and biodiversity enhancement. 
42  Ref.  Theme  Action  Measures of success  Action Owner  Target start date Expected duration 
 CCBe1 
  Ensure climate change and biodiversity is  
 considered a priority in decision making across all Council services  No. of key policies and processes reviewed which consider carbon reduction  Council-wide  2022-23 2 years 
  
 CCBe2    Ensure Councillors and employees complete  carbon literacy / introduction to climate change/  Naturewise training. Inclusion of climate change 
 within induction process. % of Councillors and employees received  training 
  HR, Council-wide  2022-23 Ongoing programme 
 CCBe3 
   Engage employees and Trade Unions to renew  job descriptions to include climate change and biodiversity responsibilities where applicable, 
 e.g. managers, budget holders, planning.  % of job descriptions renewed  HR  2023-24 Ongoing programme 
 CCBe4   
viour  Facilitate transition towards a ‘paperless Council’ 
 through, for example, digitisation of wage slips, 
 report packs, contracts, applications.  Reduction in volume of paper used for printing Services  HR, Committee  2022 Ongoing programme 
 CCBe5  
BehaFacilitate corporate volunteering for climate and  
 biodiversity action  No. of corporate volunteer hours   HR, Natural 
 Environment  2023-24 Ongoing programme 
 CCBe6   Investigate the possibility of divesting pensions  and other investment portfolios away from fossil 
 fuels in support of green energy.  Carbon reduction targets in place  Governance  2022 Ongoing programme 
 CCBe7   Facilitate community events and activities to  raise awareness of climate change and how to 
 reduce carbon footprints.  No. of events/activities  Climate Change  2023 Ongoing programme 
  Climate Change Strategy 
Appendix 2 Action Plan to Net Zero Carbon 
Climate Change Programme Action Plan 
43 