GREATERMANCHESTER-CA.GOV .UK | 1  
5 YEAR 
ENVIRONMENT 
PLAN FOR GREATER 
MANCHESTER
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
2019-20242 | EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
INTRODUCTION
Our environment in Greater Manchester 
underpins all aspects of our daily lives. We 
face urgent and significant environmental 
challenges in Greater Manchester. They 
require us all to take action now.  
Greater Manchester has a history of industrial 
and social innovation that we need to 
harness. Our People, Our Place – the Greater 
Manchester Strategy sets a clear vision for 
Greater Manchester to be one of the best 
places in the world to grow up, get on in life 
and grow old. This environment plan brings 
together, and is a key part of, a set of bold 
plans for achieving that for our current and 
future generations, setting out what we all 
need to do to tackle those challenges and capitalise on the opportunities and benefits 
that will come from taking action.  
The approach taken in our plan is 
underpinned by 5 key principles. It is a plan 
that is: 
1. For all of us 
2. Focussed on urgent action
3. Visionary
4. Ambitious 
5. To be reported on
 
The plan has been developed with input 
from countless representatives from across 
the city-region and the country. This form 
of engagement, along with the public’s 
vision, were key foundations of the 2018 Springboard Report1 , published after the 2018 
Green Summit. We need to continue this 
collaborative approach as we implement the 
actions in this plan. 
1https://www.greatermanchester-ca.gov.uk/media/1317 /springboard-report.pdfGREATERMANCHESTER-CA.GOV .UK | 3  
WHAT CHALLENGES 
ARE WE FACING?
The challenges we face
We face several major environmental 
challenges that threaten the future health 
and prosperity of our city region:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 As set out in the Greater Manchester 
Strategy, Local Industrial Strategy and 
Population Health Plan2 , we also face a set of 
broader challenges to our:
• Places –  the need to create vibrant and 
sustainable places in our city region. 
• Economy –  the need to increase 
productivity.
• People –  the need to improve the health 
and quality of life of our residents.
In tackling our environmental challenges, 
we must harness to potential for delivering 
economic, social and environmental benefits 
together.The threat of climate change – reducing our 
carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions 
Mitigating climate change is the most 
significant of our environmental challenges. 
We need to make our fair contribution to 
global commitments aimed at limiting global 
temperature rise. 
Research was carried out in 2018 by the 
Tyndall Centre for Climate Research3 to 
calculate what a fair contribution looks like 
for Greater Manchester. It concluded that 
urgent action was needed to put Greater 
Manchester on a path to ‘carbon neutrality’ 
by 2038, initiating an immediate programme 
of mitigation delivering an annual average of 
15% cuts in emissions.• Challenge 1:  
Mitigating climate change 
• Challenge 2:  
Air quality
• Challenge 3:  
Production and consumption of 
resources 
• Challenge 4:  
Natural environment
• Challenge 5:  
Resilience and adaptation to the 
impacts of climate change 
2http://www.gmhsc.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/GM-Population-Health-Plan-Full-Plan.pdf 
3https://www.research.manchester.ac.uk/portal/files/83000155/Tyndall_Quantifying_Paris_for_Manchester_Report_FINAL_PUBLISHED_rev1.pdf4 | EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Models of potential emission reduction 
pathways 
Greater Manchester Combined Authority 
(GMCA) commissioned research to 
understand potential carbon reduction 
pathways to implement these 
recommendations using a model called 
SCATTER (Setting City Area Targets and 
Trajectories for Emissions Reductions)3 . 
This provides different pathways depending 
on local decisions taken across over 40 
different interventions, which can each be 
implemented to 4 different extents. 
Figure 1 sets out potential carbon reduction 
pathways for Greater Manchester, against the 
budget recommended by the Tyndall Centre’s 
research.  
This shows that:
• Under “SCATTER Level 4” pathway (each 
of the 40+ interventions pulled to the 
maximum extent), carbon neutrality is 
possible to achieve but emissions of 
nearly 20% above the Tyndall Centre’s 
recommended budget are produced by 
2050.   
• Under the “SCATTER GM” pathway (an 
estimate of what is currently planned and 
what might be achievable in the future) 
emissions of over double the Tyndall’s 
recommended budget are produced by 
2050.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
This means that there is a gap between what 
we know we need to achieve, and what we 
believe is immediately possible. The plan 
therefore sets out actions that everyone 
can take now, whilst accepting that future 
innovation will be required to accelerate 
carbon reduction
Figure 1 – Potential Carbon Reduction Pathways for 
Greater Manchester; Source: Anthesis
3https://www.anthesisgroup.com/scatter-carbon-footprint-reduction-tool  SCATTER 
GM
191.8 MtCO 2SCATTER 
L4
111.9 MtCO 2Tyndall
94.5 MtCO 22016- 2050 
Total 
EmissionsMtCO2per year
-202468101214
2015 2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050Tyndall budget (adjusted)
SCATTER GM preferred
pathway, with CCS
SCATTER Level 4, with CCSGREATERMANCHESTER-CA.GOV .UK | 5  
Figure 2 shows the scale of reductions 
needed over the next 8 years alone, during 
which time:  
• We would need to reduce our current 
annual emissions by more than half to 
put ourselves on the “SCATTER Level 4” 
pathway.  
• We would need to reduce our current 
annual emissions by more than two 
thirds to meet the Tyndall Centre’s 
recommended budget. Figure 2 – Potential Carbon Budgets for Greater Manchester; Source: Anthesis
 - 10.00 20.00 30.00 40.00 50.00
2018-2022 2023-2027MtCO 2per 5 years
Current and next UK Carbon Budget periods SCATTER GMSCATTER L4TyndallHalf of current 
annual emissions6 | EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Using the models to inform our plans 
Models have their limitations. The principle 
value of the models to us is:  
• Informing the scale of the challenge 
we face – reductions on this scale will 
be extremely challenging to achieve, 
requiring unprecedented transformational 
change and financial investment.  
• Informing our overall approach – models 
indicate the choices we have in relying on 
national level action (e.g. decarbonisation 
of the national grid) versus taking local 
level action (e.g. local renewable energy 
generation).  
• Informing our priorities – the sectors 
where the most significant reductions in 
our CO2 emissions will come from (see 
Figure 3).  
• Informing our actions – the types of 
actions we need to take in each of these 
sectors to reduce emissions.  • Informing our goals and monitoring 
progress – what these actions need to 
achieve and therefore what we should 
monitor to track progress. 
Going further and closing the gap
The plan sets out an indication of the scale of 
change assumed in the SCATTER GM model 
to show the challenge we face. Going beyond 
that and towards the “SCATTER L4 Pathway” 
would require even more radical action, 
some of which are not thought feasible (e.g. 
the need for every private vehicle on Greater 
Manchester’s roads being zero emissions by 
2025). We need to establish a platform for 
innovation to occur.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 This innovation is partly technical (e.g. 
increasing the efficiency or effectiveness 
of existing solutions, regulatory changes), 
partly financial (e.g. devising innovative 
finance mechanisms to increase the rate of 
deployment) and partly social innovation (e.g. 
encouraging the need for fair and equitable 
transition, behavior change plus policy and 
regulatory nudge mechanisms).
Figure 3 – Sectors where emission reductions come from (“SCATTER GM” pathway) Source: Anthesis02468101214
2015 2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050MtCO2e
Industry Commercial building heat, hot water and cooking
Domestic building heat, hot water and cooking Freight
Public transport Cars
Other localGREATERMANCHESTER-CA.GOV .UK | 7  
Our vision  
We want Greater Manchester to be a clean, carbon neutral, climate 
resilient city region with a thriving natural environment and circular, 
zero-waste economy where:  
• Our infrastructure will be smart and fit for the future: we will 
have an integrated, clean and affordable public transport 
system, resource efficient buildings, greater local community 
renewable energy, cleaner air, water and greenspace for all.  
 
• All citizens will have access to green space in every community, 
more trees including in urban areas, active travel networks, 
environmental education and healthy and locally-produced 
food.  
• Citizens and businesses will adopt sustainable living and 
businesses practices, focusing on local solutions to deliver a 
prosperous economy.Our aims  
1. Mitigating climate change: For our city region to be carbon 
neutral by 2038 and meet carbon budgets that comply with 
international commitments.  
2. Air quality: To improve our air quality, meeting World Health 
Organisation guidelines on air quality by 2030 and supporting 
the UK Government in meeting and maintaining all thresholds 
for key air pollutants at the earliest date.  
3. Sustainable consumption and production: To put us on a path 
to being a circular economy, recycling 65% of our municipal 
waste by 2035 and reducing the amount of waste we produce.  
4. Natural environment: To protect, maintain and enhance 
our natural environment for all our benefit, taking steps to 
implement and achieve environmental net gain.  
5. Resilience and adaptation to climate change: To be prepared 
for the impacts of climate change and already be adapting to 
the future changes from any increase in climate shocks and 
stresses.
In meeting these aims, we need to maximise the positive impacts on our health and prosperity that these actions will bring.WHERE DO WE 
NEED TO GET TO?8 | EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Our plan sets out the urgent actions all of us 
need to take over the next 5 years.
 
Our aims can only be achieved by everyone 
committing to taking the actions outlined in 
this plan. The plan focusses on the key parts 
of our daily lives where action is required and 
a small set of key priorities within each of 
those areas, where we need to take action 
over the next 5 years and beyond to achieve 
our aims. 
These areas and priorities are linked and 
need tackling as part of a single, coherent 
approach rather than in isolation. In delivering this plan, we need to adopt an approach that 
reflects the links, complexities and the role 
of individuals and numerous organisations in 
delivering the aims set out in this plan. To do 
this, we want to establish a mission-oriented 
approach  to tackling our environmental 
challenges. Rather than focussing on 
particular sectors, this approach focuses on 
problem-specific challenges facing society, 
which requires many different sectors’ 
involvement to solve.  
WHAT DO WE NEED TO DO OVER THE 
NEXT FIVE YEARS?GREATERMANCHESTER-CA.GOV .UK | 9  
Figure 4 – Potential components of a Greater Manchester Clean Growth Mission
Source: University College London Institute for Innovation and Public Purpose (UCL - IIPP)All citizens of Greater Manchester lead 
carbon- neutral lives by 2038Net zero carbon region by 2038Climate Change
ConstructionNatural 
CapitalEducationManufacturing 
and Materials
Grow -your-own 
tree-based 
sustainable 
drainage systemsDigital 
and MediaHealth
Energy
Linked industries 
exchange waste 
products in a 
circular marketClean inner and 
outer -city transit 
links prioritising 
walkability and 
demographic need
Greater Manchester 
embedded 
curriculum for 
carbon neutralityResidential and 
industrial deep 
retrofit, with training 
schemes embedded 
in construction and 
utilities
Carbon neutral living within the Greater 
Manchester economy by 2038Carbon neutral City Region by 2038Climate Change
Construction
EnvironmentEducationManufacturing 
and Materials
Digital 
and MediaHealth
Energy Transport
Climate resilient 
public realmCitizen -oriented 
Circular Economy 
and Sharing 
Economy InitiativesWalkability, 
cycleability and 
demography -led 
clean transit links
Behaviour change 
for zero carbon 
livingCarbon neutral 
retrofit and new -build 
for residents and 
industries
21stCentury 
energy supplychallenge
mission
sectors
projects10 | EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Our energy supply
Summary of the challenges and 
opportunities 
We need to reduce CO2 emissions that are 
produced by the energy we to power our 
transport and heat and power our buildings, 
shifting away from fossil fuels to renewable 
sources. There are challenges for our 
electricity infrastructure associated with 
this shift to renewable electricity generation, 
low carbon heating and electric vehicles. 
Through the Greater Manchester Spatial 
Framework, standards for new buildings and 
developments will be set, but we still need 
to increase renewable energy generation 
and low carbon heating in existing homes 
and buildings. To do this, residents will need 
support to help make the right decisions, 
making sure everyone can benefit from these 
changes. Priority 1:  Increasing 
local renewable 
electricity generation, 
adding at least a 
further 45MW  by 
2024
Priority 2: 
Decarbonising how 
we heat out buildings, 
adding at least a 
further 10TWh  of low 
carbon heating by 
2024
Priority 3: Increasing 
the diversity and 
flexibility of our 
supply, adding at 
least a further 45MW  
of diverse and flexible 
load by 2024
Priority 1: “SCATTER GM” pathway 2040:
• 50% of all households have the equivalent of a 
16m2 solar PV system, with an additional 5.5km2 on 
commercial rooftops or in ground-mounted installations 
• 550 on-shore wind turbines delivering around 3.4TWh/
year (by 2050)
• x4.5 increase in current biomass capacity delivering 
around 4TWh/year
Priority 2: “SCATTER GM” pathway 2040:
• Phasing out gas boilers so that they account for less 
than 35% of home heating, with 60% of all heating 
(domestic and commercial) supplied by low carbon 
heating. SUMMARY OF OUR 
PRIORITIESSUMMARY OF THE SCALE OF THE CHALLENGEGREATERMANCHESTER-CA.GOV .UK | 11  
Residents
• Install renewable energy at your home
• Switch to a renewable energy supplier 
• Plan now for when you next need to replace your current heating 
system 
Local Authorities
• Will procure renewable energy tariffs (from GM sources if possible) when they are next procured
• Will complete a full assessment of the potential of our assets for renewable energy and develop these assets (where 
financially viable) by the end of 2021
• When replacing heating systems in buildings, will install low carbon alternatives where viable, seeking to avoid carbon 
intensive technologies (gas, coal, oil)
Businesses and other organisations
• Install renewable energy generation at your premises and 
partner with community energy groups
• Switch to a renewable energy supplier 
• Access energy related business support from the Growth 
Company
• Plan now for when you are next due to replace your heating 
system
What we need from government policy
• Work with us to develop the Energy Transition Region concept 
to support innovation
• Accelerate and deepen grid decarbonisation
• Stable and long-term policy landscape
• Decision on long-term decarbonisation of heat
Local policy  
• Establish an investment vehicle to develop assets for renewable energy and deliver renewable energy generation on estate.  
• Require 20% renewable energy generation at new developments 
• Examine the potential to establish a GM collective solar PV/battery purchase to drive up residential uptake
• Seek funding to roll out Local Area Energy Planning across GM to identify which heating solutions are best suited to which areas of the 
city-region
• Identify “Heat and Energy Network Opportunity Areas” and require an assessment of the viability of connecting new developments to a 
heat network within these areas
• Convene key partners (industry, academia and utility providers) with a view to them leading the development of a hydrogen strategy for 
Greater Manchester
Other key partners
• Electricity North West – lead the transition to a “Smart Grid” to help optimise both the generation and use of electricity and facilitate the 
local trading of electricityGreater Manchester Health and Social Care Partnership 
• Explore options to purchase green energy   
• Encourage innovation and support new technologies 
• Work with GM partners to assess opportunities for generating 
onsite renewable or ultra-low carbon energy 
SUMMARY OF OUR ACTIONS – ENERGY SUPPL Y12 | EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Our transport and travel
Summary of the challenges and 
opportunities 
We need to improve our air quality and reduce 
CO2 emissions that are produced by the way 
we, and the goods we use, travel within the 
city region. To do this, we need to reduce 
the amount we travel in fossil-fuel powered 
vehicles, by using sustainable modes and 
shifting away from fossil fuel powered 
transport to zero emissions (tailpipe) or 
cleaner alternatives. We also need to address 
exceedances of Nitrogen Dioxide (NO2) at the 
roadside, tackling the most polluting vehicles 
in a way that delivers compliance with the 
legal limits for NO2 in the shortest possible 
time.  Priority 1:  Increasing 
use of public 
transport and active 
travel modes
Priority 2: Phasing 
out of fossil-fuelled 
private vehicles 
and replacing them 
with zero emission 
(tailpipe) alternatives SUMMARY OF OUR 
PRIORITIES
Priority 3: Tackling 
the most polluting 
vehicles on our roads 
Priority 4: 
Establishing a zero 
emissions bus fleet
Priority 5: 
Decarbonising freight 
transport and shifting 
freight to rail and 
water transport SUMMARY OF THE SCALE OF THE CHALLENGE
Priority 1:
• Increasing the proportion of trips by sustainable modes.
• Reducing the overall amount we travel. 
Priority 2:
• 100% of all cars are zero emissions (tailpipe) by 2035. 
Priority 4:
• 100% of all buses are zero emissions (tailpipe) by 2035 
Priority 5:
• Decarbonising freight transport, delivering a shift away 
from road freight and enabling more efficient freight 
practices GREATERMANCHESTER-CA.GOV .UK | 13  
Residents
• Walk and cycle for short journeys
• Use public transport for longer journeys
• Cut costs, congestion, parking problems and pollution by sharing a car with a colleague 
or friend.
• Switch off your engine when at a standstill.
• Buy an electric car – if you do, make sure you are on the right electricity  tariff
Businesses and other organisations
• Support your employees in doing the 
right thing, encouraging flexible working 
and use of public transport, cycling/ 
walking and car-sharing
• Switch your car/van fleet to Electric 
Vehicles and consider charging 
infrastructure
• When replacing other vehicles, 
purchase the least polluting and most 
efficient model
• Maintain your fleet to minimise 
emissions
Local Authorities
• Procure zero emission (tailpipe) cars/
vans where suitable and cost effective 
when we come to replace existing fleet 
and keep under review the options for 
other types of vehicles
Greater Manchester Health and Social 
Care Partnership
• Collaborate closely with stakeholders 
to support local area improvement of 
travel services and infrastructure
• Work with partners and stakeholders 
to assist with improvement of local air 
quality
• Monitor the environmental impacts 
associated with suppliers’ transport 
and logistics and work with them to find 
ways to minimise their traffic burden
Local policy
• Implement the 2040 Transport Strategy Delivery Plan, including in the next 5 years:
• Implementing the Mayor’s Challenge Fund for walking and cycling
• Implementing a “Streets for All” approach to street design and management.
• Expanding and promoting the city region’s Electric Vehicle charging network and aim to complete the businesses case for further ex -
pansion.
• Continue to develop a Full Business Case of proposals to reduce NO2 exceedances to submit to government by the end of 2019. Sub -
ject to approval and sufficient government funding being received as a result, measures will then be implemented as set out in the Full 
Business Case.
• Implementing a programme to retrofit existing buses to reduce emissions (subject to funding).
• Assessing and developing a roadmap to deliver a zero emission bus fleet
• Assessing and developing a roadmap to reduce freight emissions and support modal shift.What we need from government policy
• Long-term sustainable funding, including 
a fully devolved, long-term infrastructure 
budget 
• Greater powers, including over rail 
franchising stations  and support 
decisions around reform of the bus 
market.
•  Test Mobility as a Service approaches 
• Radically improve connectivity with other 
UK cities .
• Invest in rail electrification or in piloting low 
carbon alternatives (such as hydrogen)SUMMARY OF OUR ACTIONS – TRANSPORT AND TRAVEL14 | EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Our homes, workplaces 
and public buildings
Summary of the challenges and 
opportunities 
We need to reduce CO2 emissions produced 
by the excessive use of energy, particularly 
in heating our homes and commercial and 
public buildings. This will also help residents 
to live in warm homes which are cheaper to 
run and healthier to live in and contribute 
to efforts to reduce fuel poverty in the city 
region. Achieving this will require owners 
of existing homes and buildings to make 
improvements to current levels of insulation 
to reduce heat loss through the building 
fabric well beyond the basic measures 
they might already have in place (e.g. loft 
insulation, draught proofing). Priority 1: Reducing 
the heat demand 
from existing 
homes focussing 
on initiating a 
fundamental shift in 
whole house retrofit 
by retrofitting homes 
by 2024.   
Priority 2: Reducing 
the heat demand 
from existing 
commercial and 
public buildings
Priority 3: Reducing 
the heat demand in 
new buildingsSUMMARY OF OUR 
PRIORITIES
Priority 1:
• Retrofit measures 
installed at 61,000 homes 
per year.SUMMARY OF THE SCALE OF THE CHALLENGE
Priority 2:
• 22% reduction in heating 
and cooling demand, with 
a 10% reduction by 2025. 
per year.GREATERMANCHESTER-CA.GOV .UK | 15  
Residents
• Get the basics right – including LED 
lighting and draught-proofing 
• Upgrade your home insulation – loft, 
cavity wall and draught
• Think about whole-house retrofit, 
particularly if carrying out renovations
Businesses and other organisations 
• Sign up to the Net Zero Carbon 
Buildings commitment
• Measure, report on and improve 
the operational energy efficiency of 
premises, coming together within 
sectors to do so. 
• Consider greener, more energy efficient 
premises when current or future 
contracts require renewal.
• Engage with landlords/tenants 
landowners and tenants over key issues 
– e.g. data sharing, energy efficiency 
measures, green energy. 
Local policy  
• Develop a GM retrofit partnership/ 
accelerator to tackle sector 
development/skills and access to 
finance/capacity
• Launch a major new drive to raise 
standards in the private rented sector, 
including the development of a GM 
Good Landlord standard.
• Investigate encouraging greater energy 
efficiency through council tax and 
business rates and other financial 
vehicles. 
• Implement a business support 
programme for energy efficiency
• Require zero carbon development by 
2028
Local Authorities
• Standardise measurement and 
reporting of the operational efficiency of 
their buildings.
• GMCA and LAs will aim to obtain an 
average DEC of rating D or better by 
2024 and C or better by 2030 for their 
public buildings where economically 
viable.  
Greater Manchester Health and Social 
Care Partnership:
• Work with partners to include 
sustainability indicators in their review 
of buildings
Other key partners
• Social Housing Providers  – 
commitments to the efficiency of 
existing homes and to building new 
homes to net zero carbon in advance of 
2028
• Voluntary, Community and Social 
Enterprise Organisations  – continue to 
work with partners as we develop a GM 
retrofit partnership focussed on helping 
people and communities 
Other key partners
• Working with us to develop new 
technology and financial models to 
make domestic and commercial retrofit 
at scale a possibility.
• Meeting commitments on smart meter 
roll-out.
• Changing the Energy Company 
Obligation (ECO) funding to ensure it is 
more effective at meeting GM’s needs.SUMMARY OF OUR ACTIONS – HOMES, WORKPLACES AND PUBLIC BUILDINGS  16 | EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Our production and 
consumption of resources
Summary of the challenges and 
opportunities 
As part of building a thriving and sustainable 
city region, we need to promote economic 
and resource productivity, eliminate waste 
and increase business opportunities through 
innovation, which in turn will stimulate skills 
development and jobs. The damage done to 
our environment caused by waste products 
can be if avoided if more sustainable 
decisions are made at the production stage. 
To tackle this problem, we need to change 
the way that we, as consumers, treat end 
of life products. At the same time, we also 
need to work with industry to encourage 
more circular, sustainable and resource 
efficient business models; from using 
more sustainable materials to making sure 
manufacturing processes maximise resource 
and energy efficiency. Priority 1: Producing 
goods and services 
more sustainably, 
moving to a circular 
economy
Priority 2: Becoming 
more responsible 
consumers
Priority 3: Managing 
our waste as 
sustainably as 
possible SUMMARY OF OUR 
PRIORITIES
Priority 4: Reducing 
unnecessary food 
waste
Priority 1:
• 50-77% reduction in 
industrial emissions (38% 
by 2025).SUMMARY OF THE SCALE OF THE CHALLENGE
Priority 3:
• Achieve a recycling rate of 
65% by 2035. Priority 2
• Limit any increase in 
the quantity of waste 
produced to 20%. GREATERMANCHESTER-CA.GOV .UK | 17  
Residents
• Reduce the amount of waste you 
produce and use reusable products 
• Cut down the amount of plastics you 
use.
• Buy sustainable products 
• Look at alternatives to purchasing large 
items such as lease agreements or 
take-back schemes. 
• Recycle as much as you can 
• Reduce the amount of food you waste
• Support local food growing and 
redistribution  initiatives and 
organisations
Businesses and other organisations
• Review your processes to look where 
you can make efficiencies in design and 
production. 
• Make sure sustainability is part of your 
procurement policy
• Take action to reduce the amount of 
food your organisation wastes
• Support local food growing and 
redistribution  initiatives and 
organisations
Lead policy
• Collaborate with the GM Sustainable 
Business Partnership, including a focus 
on resource efficiency
• Explore ways to support innovation 
that will help us transition to a circular 
economy.
• Continue to develop the Plastic Free 
GM campaign, including launching a 
roadmap and Plastic Pact for the public 
sector 
• Develop and consult on a Zero Waste 
Strategy to set out our approach to 
becoming a zero waste city region.  
• Produce a roadmap and future food 
strategy, which will set out a pathway 
and priorities for our food system. 
Local Authorities
• Embed environmental sustainability 
criteria in social value procurement 
mechanisms
• Provide Carbon Literacy for all staff 
involved in procuring activities
• Aim to eradicate avoidable single use 
plastic on the public estate.
Local Authorities
• Voluntary, Community and Social 
Enterprise Organisations  – continue to 
work with partners across these areas, 
particularly on the development of our 
food strategy. 
What we need from government policy
• Further powers and incentives in 
increase reuse and recycling for both 
residents and businesses.
Greater Manchester Health and Social Care Partnership
• Work with partner organisations to support the development of waste management action plans across Trusts
• Take an approach towards a continual reduction in levels of waste, relative to the size of the organisation
• Have a system/process in place that identifies suitable opportunities to convert “waste” into a resource for community  
groups or charities
• Support staff on how to reduce food wastage to reduce the environmental impactSUMMARY OF OUR ACTIONS –SUSTAINABLE CONSUMPTION AND PRODUCTION:18 | EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Our natural environment
Summary of the challenges and 
opportunities 
We need to prioritise action over the next 
5 years to protect, maintain and enhance 
our key natural assets (air, land, water and 
biodiversity) and the multiple benefits 
(ecosystem services) they provide.  
 
Ultimately, we want to achieve measurable 
improvements in our natural environment – 
environmental net gain. A key first step in this 
will be implementing biodiversity net gain 
– delivering improvements through habitat 
creation or enhancement after avoiding or 
mitigating harm as far as possible. To achieve 
these ambitions, we need to mobilise existing 
and new sources of funding into our natural 
environment, increasing the value we place 
on it, as well as communicating and engaging 
about it, so that we are all better connected 
with nature.  
 Greater Manchester is identified as the Urban 
Pioneer as part of the Government’s 25 
Year Environment Plan. This means we are 
testing new tools and methods for investing 
in and managing the natural environment. 
Significant progress has been made in 
developing a natural capital approach and 
progressing our priorities.  
Priority 1: Managing 
our land sustainably, 
including planting 1m 
trees by 2024Priority 2: Managing 
our water and 
its environment 
sustainably
Priority 3: Achieving 
a net gain in 
biodiversity for new 
developmentPriority 4: Increasing 
investment into our 
natural environment
Priority 5: Increasing 
engagement with our 
natural environmentSUMMARY OF OUR PRIORITIES
Priority 2: 
• Plant 3m trees by 2035 
and a further 1-2m by 
2050
• Restore 50-75% of our 
peatlandsSUMMARY OF THE SCALE OF 
THE CHALLENGE GREATERMANCHESTER-CA.GOV .UK | 19  
Residents
• If you have a garden or an allotment, 
manage this for wildlife. 
• Visit, spend time and be active in local 
green and blue spaces. 
• Volunteer for projects that protect or 
improve the environment in your local 
area. 
Businesses and other organisations
• Manage any gardens or land for wildlife
• Put in place green roofs and/or green 
walls and/or plant trees.
• Invest in Greater Manchester’s natural 
environment 
• Promote environmental volunteering 
amongst your employees 
Landowners and farmers
• Enter into agri-environment agreements 
to fund environmental improvements on 
your land 
• Access additional funding to create 
or restore ponds through new District 
Licensing scheme for great crested 
newts 
Local Authorities
• Build natural capital into projects 
to maximise the value that the 
environment brings including on estates 
and land.  
Residents
• City of Trees – develop, embed and support delivery of a Greater Manchester Tree and 
Woodland Strategy, contribute to 3m tree planting target and increase volunteering and 
engagement. 
• Environment Agency – explore the development of a Natural Capital Plan for Greater 
Manchester and work with United Utilities to deliver the benefits of its investment across 
the Irwell and Upper Mersey catchments. 
• Greater Manchester Health and Social Care Partnership – ensure that their approach 
to developing a Greater Manchester Population Health system understands the 
importance of the natural environment as a key wider determinant of health, and seeks 
to ensure that action undertaken is reflective of that understanding; promote the health 
benefits of green space and maximise the opportunities to incorporate this into their 
programmes.
• Lancashire Wildlife Trust – support delivery of the Greater Manchester Wetlands Nature 
Improvement Area and increase the number of people engaged with nature. 
• Natural England – identify peatland restoration opportunities, new Great Crested 
Newt licensing scheme, lead developing biodiversity net gain guidance and explore 
application of green infrastructure standards and establishing of a nature recovery 
network.
• Royal Horticultural Society – inspire more of Greater Manchester’s residents to get 
involved in gardening and improving their local environments, working in partnership 
with other community growing projects
• United Utilities – invest £300m at waste water treatment works to improve river quality 
(2015-2020) and implement further planned improvements in 2020-2025 business plan
Local policy
• Continue the work of the urban pioneer, embedding a natural capital approach into 
strategy and plan development.
• Support peatland restoration as part of Resilience Strategy.
• Support the delivery of a biodiversity net gain approach in new development.
• Support the development of a Greater Manchester Environment Fund.
• Support the implementation of the Natural Capital Investment Plan (subject to 
approval) to increase private sources of funding. 
• Launch a programme of innovative funding mechanisms to deliver increased 
investment in nature-based adaptation solutions (subject to approval).SUMMARY OF OUR ACTIONS – 
NATURAL ENVIRONMENT:20 | EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Our resilience and 
adaptation to climate 
change
Summary of the challenges and 
opportunities 
We are already experiencing impacts 
from a rapidly changing and increasingly 
extreme climate. These impacts are 
projected to increase over time and risk 
holding back our efforts to deliver our wider 
ambitions. Resilience is therefore about 
how our city region can meet its ambitions 
whilst ensuring it is safe and secure, is 
addressing its key vulnerabilities and can 
meet expected or unexpected disruptive 
challenges. These efforts and investments 
need to be underpinned by robust action 
on climate adaptation to protect the most 
vulnerable communities (who are often the 
most exposed and least able to deal with 
climate change impacts), our economy, key 
infrastructure and our natural environment. Priority 1: Embedding 
climate change 
resilience and 
adaptation in all 
policies
Priority 2: Increasing 
the resilience of and 
investment in our 
critical infrastructure 
Priority 3: 
Implementing 
a prioritised 
programme of 
nature-based climate 
adaptation actionSUMMARY OF OUR 
PRIORITIES
Priority 4: Improving 
monitoring and 
reporting
GREATERMANCHESTER-CA.GOV .UK | 21  
Residents
• Check if you are at risk of flooding and 
sign up for flood warnings. 
• If in a flood risk area, make your home 
more resilient. 
• Check if you have the right level of 
insurance. 
• In extremely hot weather, look after 
yourself and neighbours/more 
vulnerable. 
• Use water efficiently and install a water 
meter.SUMMARY OF OUR ACTIONS – 
RESILIENCE AND ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE
Other key partners
• United Utilities  – deliver £100-250m 
of additional investment for long-term 
resilience projects (2015-2020) and 
manage drought (as per 2018 Drought 
Plan).
• Other infrastructure providers – support 
the development of the Resilience 
Strategy
• Environment Agency  – manage 
government investment of £46m by 
2021, protecting over 1,300 properties. 
Businesses and other organisations 
• Check if you are at risk of flooding and 
sign up for flood warnings. 
• If in a flood risk area, make your 
premises more resilient and link up with 
neighbouring properties.  
• Check if you have the right level of 
insurance. 
• Put in place green roofs and/or green 
walls and/or plant trees.
• Use water efficiently and install a water 
meter.
Local policy  
• Develop a Resilience Strategy, with a 
roadmap published in 2019. 
• Undertake a Strategic Flood Risk 
Assessment to ensure future growth 
aspirations consider flood risk. 
• Implement proposals to manage flood 
risk and the water environment in new 
development.
• Develop an Infrastructure Strategy 
to address our key infrastructure 
challenges relating to flood risk and 
resilience. 
• Development by 2021 an investment 
strategy for future flood risk 
infrastructure. 
• Subject to formal approval, GMCA 
establish a programme of innovative 
funding mechanisms to deliver 
increased investment in nature-based 
adaptation solutions (INGITION).
• Consider the development of 
appropriate indicators to monitor and 
evaluate how prepared we are for the 
future impacts of climate change. 
What we need from government policy
• Continued and increased funding to 
support the flood and coastal risk 
management programme22 | EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
HOW WILL WE TRACK PROGRESS?
GMCA will report annually on progress with 
delivering the plan on behalf of Greater 
Manchester against a set of key indicators 
drawn from existing data. For commitments 
made by GMCA, Local Authorities (LAs) 
and others in this plan relating to their 
operations, governance arrangements will be 
established to track and report on progress in 
a coordinated way across organisations. A list 
of potential measures is set out in the plan 
– the plan sets out areas where these will be 
developed further. GREATERMANCHESTER-CA.GOV .UK | 23  
WHAT SHOULD BE OUR APPROACH?
In delivering our environmental aims, we 
need to maximise the positive impacts on our 
people, economy and places. This will require 
us all to take new approaches, across areas 
such as innovation and funding, to tacking 
the challenges we face. This approach is 
supported in the findings of the Independent 
Prosperity Review.
Optimising the economic benefits 
Careful implementation of our approach is 
needed so that achieving our aims does not 
act as a constraint on economic growth, 
particularly as the economy’s reliance on 
carbon is diminished. Taking this approach 
will minimise costs of services, particularly 
energy, to our households and businesses. If 
we take the actions in this plan, we could all 
save up to £1000 per household per year on 
our energy bills. 
We can secure first mover advantage 
from accelerating the transition to a low 
carbon economy, creating jobs in the future economy. We already have a diverse and 
thriving Low Carbon Environmental Goods 
and Services sector, which has the potential 
to grow further if we achieve the aims set out 
in our plan. It employs over 45,000 people, 
has annual sales of £6.7bn and growth of 
6.3%, outperforming the UK average to be 
ranked 3rd in the UK. 
There are also costs of not acting. If we don’t 
act now, the impacts of climate change could 
cost us 10 times more by 2100 than if we 
manage to limit global temperature rises in 
line with international commitments.
Optimising the health and social benefits 
We know that environmental actions provide 
significant health benefits for our population. 
Implementing this plan will also allow us to 
address health inequalities and do our part to 
promote intergenerational equity.
Wherever possible, this plan must interlink 
with prevention and health improvement 
efforts across Greater Manchester through LA public health teams, Public Health 
England and the Greater Manchester Health 
and Social Care Partnership. Efforts must be 
focused on addressing health inequalities 
such as the difference in life expectancy 
between communities. Low income 
communities are amongst those groups 
that are more affected by air pollution, whilst 
other environmental factors such as access 
to green space and the quality and warmth 
of housing also have a significant bearing on 
health.  
There are also costs of not acting. For 
example, extreme weather (e.g. the 2003 
heatwave) had a large impact on health 
services. It is estimated that the health and 
social care costs of air pollution in England 
could reach £5.3 billion by 2035 unless action 
is taken. Failure to act quickly will exacerbate 
existing national health challenges, place 
undue financial strain on the NHS, and 
worsen health inequalities both within the UK 
and internationally.  24 | EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Doing things differently
In order to deliver our environmental vision 
and aims this plan sets out and to close the 
gap between what is needed and where we 
are now, we need to take different approaches 
to the following:
• Supporting innovation in technology
• Taking new approaches to finance and 
funding 
• Building on existing partnerships 
between the public, private and voluntary, 
community and social enterprise 
organisations 
• Showing leadership 
• Engaging and educating residents, 
communities and businesses 
• Upskilling our workforce  
 
SUPPORTING INNOVATION IN 
TECHNOLOGY
Innovation ecosystem 
to support all firms to be 
innovative, supporting the 
creation of new products and 
services (e.g. Energy Transition 
Region proposals)
TAKING NEW APPROACHES TO 
FUNDING AND FINANCING 
Long-term sustainable funding 
models for infrastructure. 
Developing business models in 
unproven areas (whole house 
retrofit; natural environment) 
BUILDING ON EXISTING 
PARTNERSHIPS
Continuing the engagement 
from 2018 Green Summit, with 
GMCA convening stakeholders 
around key challenges and 
through a mission-oriented 
approach
SHOWING LEADERSHIP
A set of commitments from 
GMCA/LAs, plus health and 
social housing providers, 
showing they are leading by 
example. 
ENGAGING & EDUCATING 
RESIDENTS, COMMUNITIES 
AND BUSINESSES
Make a programme of carbon 
literacy available to young 
people through the GM Career 
Portal, in addition to our own 
commitments on carbon 
literacy for staff in procurement 
in GMCA and LAs 
UPSKILLING OUR 
WORKFORCE
Engage the sector in BridgeGM, 
to better link business leaders 
into schools and colleges.GREATERMANCHESTER-CA.GOV .UK | 25  
BUILDING ON EXISTING 
PARTNERSHIPS
UPSKILLING OUR 
WORKFORCEEstablishing a Clean Growth Mission
This reinforces the need to adopt an 
approach that mobilises various actors 
across traditional sector boundaries to come 
together in new ways. We want to establish 
the UK’s first city region Clean Growth Mission 
for carbon neutral living within the Greater 
Manchester economy by 2038, driving 
innovation, the creation of new technologies, 
and improved resource efficiency. The 
University College London Institute for 
Innovation and Public Purpose (UCL -IIPP) has 
already started worked with GMCA to begin 
developing this approach, exploring how 
it can be inspiring and measurable across 
the city region and want to establish this 
as the approach we will take to tackling our 
environmental challenges.26 | EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
#GMGreenCit y
GREATERMANCHESTER-CA.GOV .UK