GWYNEDD COUNCIL
Report to a meeting of the Council  
Background
1.At its meeting  on the 7 March  2019 the Council considered a motion relating  to 
climate change  and it resolved  to do our utmost to ensure that the county remains 
a vibrant, viable  and sustainable home for our children and their children for 
generations to  come. In order  to do this we would:
Declare a  Climate  Emergency
Commit to  taking  decisive action to reduce carbon  emissions and strive for 
a zero-carbon future
Look for innovative means  to achieve zero  carbon  targets.
Report back within 6 months  on positive  steps  the Council has  taken to 
reduce carbon emissions.
Call on Welsh Government and the Westminster Government to provide the requisite  powers and resources to achieve the target of a carbon-free  
Gwynedd by  2030.
2.In accordance with  the request, this report outlines  the steps which  the Council has 
taken to date.
3.It is important to note that this report is merelywhere we have hitherto reached  
and does not reflect where we wish to be. However,  in the current financial 
climate it is important that we take some  time to establish  those actions which  will 
have the greatest impact in order  to achieve the greatest benefit  from any 
investment we will need to make.
4.Attached  at Appendix 1 is a table noting the activities  already undertaken  by the 
Council to reduce our carbon footprint and to adapt our communitities to protect 
them from the effects which  are likely to arise.Date of the meeting: 19 December  2019
Report by   Councillor Dyfrig  Siencyn,  Leader  
Title: Climate Change  Emergency Plan
5.In relation to the footprint itself, the graph in Appendix 2 shows the reduction 
already achieved since we  started our plan in  2010.
6.By the end of 2018 we had reduced our footprint by 39%.  This  varies according  to 
the source  of carbon use, with  the footprint arising from  street lighting reducing 
by 59%; the footprint arising  from buildings  by 43% but the footprint  from  our fleet  
only falling 20%.  
7.It can be seen that the Council has already undertaken a considerable amount of 
work to reduce our carbon footprint  and to adapt  our communities  to meet the 
future consequences of climate  change.  
8.However, despite these efforts, we know that there  is much more to be done if we 
are to achieve the aim of a zero carbon county.  
9.The Cabinet has established a task force to consider what more needs to be done  
in order to achieve that aim and the intention is to establish  a Climate  Change 
Action Plan which will detail those  additional actions which  we would wish to 
take beyond  those  actions already  undertaken by us.  This will include what we 
can do to reduce the county’s carbon footprint  as well as the Council’s  own carbon 
footprint.
10.In order  to give structure to our consideration of what more we could do, we are 
considering a document which was released by the Friends of the Earth, and we 
will also be considering work being undertaken by Natural Resources  Wales at a 
regional level to illustrate the further  opportunities which  are available to us. 
11.The document  in Appendix 1 follows  the headings contained  in the Friends  of the 
Earth document and it notes our current  position in relation to that document. It is 
effectively a baseline of where we are today.
12.The intention for the next 3 months is to consult on the potential content  of the 
Climate Change Action Plan  before  the end of the financial  year so that the plan 
can be included as part of the  Council’s Corporate Plan.
13.Each member of the Council  will have  a role to plsy in considering how best to 
reduce our carbon  footprint and how to adapt in order to cope  with the 
consequential effects of climate change and as we conduct those  conversations 
with our communities we look forward  to everyone playing their part in that 
process.
14.The Council is asked  to receive the report, noting the steps taken so far and our 
intentions for  the future.Statutory Officers’ Observations
Monitoring Officer
The report provides  an appropriate up date to the Council following its decision in March. 
No observations to add in relation to propriety. 
Head of Finance
It is clear that what Gwynedd Council needs to do to tackle the Climate  Change  Emergency  
will mean significant  and  significant changes in behaviour.  This  may, in the long  term,  
involve a change in direction in  our day-to-day expenditure as well as investments  in capital 
schemes.  Of  course, the  requirements of the Well-being of Future Generations (Wales) Act 
already compel us to think about the long-term effects of our decisions, including  spending  
decisions.  As this  report is intended to set a benchmark, it does not place  an additional  
spending commitment on the Council  in and of itself, but the impact  of the climate crisis  will 
be an ongoing consideration when preparing  future financial strategiesAPPENDIX 1
FRIENDS OF THE EARTH : Developing and Nature Emergency
Action Plan
PUTTING OUR CLIMATE AT THE HEART OF DECISION MAKING
NUMBE
R  Action/Description  Comments
1
 Require councillors to identify whether the 
recommendations put to them would help  or 
hinder climate, air pollution and nature plans.
 It is inevitable that Councillors consider the consequences of climate on the environment 
when making decisions  and the requirements of the Well-being of Future Generations  Act 
mean that we must  consider any decisions  in the context of whether they are sustainable or 
not.  We need to consider  further whether and how  to place the same emphasis as we place  
on equality issues say. 
2  Identify both a councillor  at cabinet level and a 
lead officer as Climate and Nature  Champions 
who are required  to publish a bi-annual  
independent and audited  report to the public  on 
progress in meeting  climate  change and nature 
targets. The Council  has an Environment Department with a cabinet memberresponsible for leading 
the activities  of that department.  However it is recognised that having  declared a climate 
emergency all Council Department will have to play their  part and we will need to consider 
the arrangements for ensuring  that it happens.  The task force will need  to consider the 
appropriate management arrangements to fit in with  the Council'ds recognised procedures.   
The Council's current  activity to reduce carbon and adapt communities  is reported through 
our performance management arrangements rather than by reporting separately.3  Use additional decision-making approaches for 
complicated or contentious choices (such as 
representative Citizen Assemblies/Citizen Juries, 
participatory mapping  and budgeting, etc). Our current  representative democracy works on the basis that it is elected  representatives  
who are responsible for representing the wishes of their constituents.   That  said, we use 
Citizen Panels  and consult  widely on issues  where there are far reaching consequences  on the 
decisions that need  to be made.  Obviously,  in this field we will need to include  our 
communities in any discussions if we are going  to get the county's citizens to own any activity  
which will need  to be undertaken if we are to reduce  the county's  carbon footprint, but 
ultimately theelected members will have  to take the necessary  decisions.
4  Set interim and measurable  targets for Gwynedd  
to achieve net zero greenhouse reductions and 
meet nature restoration  goals. Our aspiration is to reach  net zero greenhouse reductions and meet nature restoration goals, 
but the Ffordd Gwynedd principles encourage us to not set a specific target  by a specific time 
(as one cannot  reasonably anticipate  how  long it will take to do the right things). However, 
our principles also note  that we should measure  our progress towards achieving the aim and 
periodically assess whether progress is sufficient. This should not affect  our ambition  in this 
area.
 Our procurement  deliberations  always consider  the impact  of our purchases on the 
environment.  In addition, there  is scope here, by means of the planning  policies  of our Joint  
Local Development Plan, which presumes in favour of sustainable development, to ensure 
that appropriate  consideration is given  to all environmental matters, where relevant, so that 
other developments  do not have a detrimental impact on our environment and climate.       See 
sections 6.2 and 6.5 of the Joint Local Development Plan:                                                                                            5
 Align all Gwynedd statutory and non-statutory  
plans, policies and guidance with  respective  
carbon reduction pathways and nature  
restoration plans, including procurement. 
See also the link to Supplementary Planning Guidance - Maintaining and Creating Distinctive 
and Sustainable  Communities.  
Also, there  is a need to consider national  and European guidelines and legislation in the 
context of our environment  and climate change. Robust arrangements are in place to ensure 
that statutory bodies  such as the Council act in a responsible way themselves, but can also 
ensure the compliance of others. 6  Review and improve how we involve citizens in 
our existing decision-making processes. Understanding our residents' needs and priorities is an important issue for Gwynedd Council. 
As we develop  the action plan we will ensure  that we include  our communities in the 
necessary conversations  which we will need to have in order to gain that undertsanding,  and 
as we are aiming to reduce the county's  overall carbon  footprint, ensuring  ownership of our 
programme by the county's residents will mean that they  will have to be part of the process.  
Ultimately however, the elected members will have  to make the decisions.
    
RAISING MONEY
NUMBE
R  Action/Description  Comments
7  Introduce a workplace car parking  levy and/or 
similar initiative to fund sustainable transport. The Council did consider charging officers  for parking several years ago and it was very 
difficult to implement at the time  as the Unions did not agree  to its implementation. Having  
said that,  there  is nothing wrong if we as a Council encourage our officers to use more 
environmentally-friendly ways of travelling  to work. Indeed, the Departments have  a great 
deal of influence to ensure  that journeys  for work purposes  are only  undertaken  when it is 
only absolutely  necessary and in an environmentally-friendly way.  In addition, the Council is 
looking to change  its fleet of small travelling vehicles,  within  the next five years, to electric 
cars. The Council's  first electric car was officially introduced on 14 November  2019. Charging  
points are being installed at the Council's offices and depots. Therefore, plans are in place to 
ensure a more environmentally-friendly Council fleet.  
8  Raise money from the UK Municipal  Bonds 
Agency for low carbon infrastructure. If we need to invest, there are a number of funding sources available  to the Council  and the 
real matter to be considered is that we are able to repay any loan rather than the source of 
that loan. 106 Agreements  enable  planning authorities to restrict land use / development (e.g. for 
affordable housing), and to ensure financial  contributions to mitigate any negative impact as 
a result of a development. This could include a contribution  towards local services or 
environmental restoration work, where  planning reasons  provide justification. See section 
6.1 of the Joint Local Development Plan, which refers  to Infrastructure and developer 
contributions.9
 Use legal  and planning mechanisms such as 
Section 106 agreements,  Community 
Infrastructure Levy and other mechanisms to 
fund climate  actions and nature restoration 
projects. 
See also a link to the Supplementary Planning Guidance on Planning  Obligations:     
10  Implement licensing of the private rented sector 
to cover enforcement costs  of minimum  energy  
efficiency standards When new  houses are built,  a definite  standard is set under  building  control legislation.  The 
Council can verify these standards to ensure that the new buildings are insulated to the 
highest standards.  It is a different matter when  a building already exists,  and although the 
Council itself ensures that its buildings are insulated to the highest  standards,  it is very difficult 
for the Council  to force landlords to insulate their properties. The Council  intends to 
encourage landlords and residents in general to insulate their houses, not only to have  a 
positive impact on the environment, but also to save our residents a great deal of money.   
Plans exist, such as “Cynllun Nyth”,  which is run under the auspices of the Welsh  Government 
and there are opportunities for landlords  and residents here to obtain more effective boilers 
that insulate  their homes relatively cheaply.
     PROTECT THE MOST VULNERABLE
NUMBE
R  Action/Description  Comments 
11  Identify the most vulnerable people in the areas  
most at risk of flooding and high heat levels and 
target adaptation policies,  actions and spending 
to these areas. Climate change has a major  impact  on our weather of course and on sea levels,  the effects 
of which are already  apparent to us now.   It is likely to become worse in the future. Flooding 
is obviously one substantial  area of risk for citizens in the most  vlnerable areas  and the 
Council is doing considerable work on the issue in conjunction with National Resources 
Wales , to plan for those communities under threat. Considerable public attention has been 
given to the pioneering  work undertaken  in Fairbourne of course but that work will have  to 
be extended to other areas in due course.  One of the lessons learned in Fairbourne is that 
the current  legislative  framework is inappropriate to enable us to deal with  the problems 
faced and we will be campaigning to change that position. It should also be noted that the 
Council is also the statutory flooding authority that reports on the practical and physical  
steps that could be taken to protect property and communities. . The service is also working 
on a risk management  plan for the rest of Gwynedd, based on river  catchment  areas. Over 
the next 10 years we intend to invest  over £2m of our resources to try and attract 
Government Grants in order to undertake  works on defences in 6 areas in Gwynedd.   Water 
shortage is an issue that needs to be considered, as well as fires that ignite on lands  that are 
unusually dry. There  is a need to be alert to these issues.  It is likely that we are going  to 
experience extended  periods of higher temperatures as seen in France during the summer  
of 2019. Some people find it very difficult to cope with this, in particular young children and 
the elderly, and therefore, there is a need to consider the Council's role in this and how we 
can act alongside others to care for our residents.   
12  Ensure that voices of the most vulnerable 
communities are also represented in council 
decision-making and council-citizen deliberations The Council  holds  information on the locations of our vulnerable adults, and the Adults,  
Health and Well-being Department and the health  service maintain contact  with them.  The 
Council therefore feels that these people's voices are being heard.BUILDINGS
NUMBE
R  Action/Description  Comments
13  Retrofit council-owned properties with high 
levels of insulation. The Council has taken action  to insulate the majority  of its buildings  to a high  standard, 
including schools. Most of the work was carried out between 2011  and 2017, including 
bedroom insulation  at 300mm,  wall cavities, heating and hot water pipes. The cost comes  to 
£344,293.11. We are still working on upgrading the insulation of boiler houses (valves etc.). 
We cannot separate the savings from the impact  of other schemes  but it has certainly made 
a substantial contribution to a 43%  reduction  of in our buildings' emissions.   
14  Help energy companies target  fuel poor or 
vulnerable households with  energy efficiency 
measures. The Council needs to consider how we can work collaboratively  with companies to be more 
effective in this area
15  Enforce minimum energy  efficiency standards in 
the private rented sector. The Council is unaware of any powers it has to compel  the private rented  sector to insulate 
their properties, as this does not appear to be one of their  current requirements. Having  
said this, of course, this sector will be encouraged in respect of the schemes  available  to 
assist them from Welsh Government,  via the Nyth scheme. 
16  Require higher  standards than current  national 
standards for privately built new homes. It is very difficult for the Council to demand standards that exceed the required  
national/legislative requirements. Having said this, there is a real need to attempt to 
influence developers to build to the highest  possible standards in terms of the quality of the 
houses they build, and certainly  the insulation  standards and modern  heating  techniques  
that do not use fossil  fuels.
17  Enforce building standards.  This is most  certainly  being  done through the Building Regulations Service. 
18
 Require homes built on council land to be 
extremely energy efficient, using the Passivhaus 
standard or similar. There has been no significant building of houses on council land  for some time, but with the 
advent of our new Housing Strategy,  we will need to ensure  that any housing built  on our 
land in future  meets the highest possible  practicable  energy efficiency  standards.    19
 Develop a heating and energy efficiency strategy 
for the area.
 We are on the verge of the third phase of the Carbon Management Programme originally  
drawn up with the Carbon  Trust during 2008-09, which  began in 2010. Phase  1 of the Carbon  
Management Programme was completed in 2015, securing a 26% reduction in CO2 emissions  
compared with the baseline for 2005 - 06. Phase 2 will be completed at the end of March  
2019 and to date, it has led to a 39.3% reduction  in our CO2 emissions, compared with the 
2005-06 baseline. In the third phase,  emphasis will be placed on large-scale renewable energy 
generation.  An area heating plan was considered as part of the original Carbon Programme  
in conjunction with other  establishments but it proved uneconomically viable to implement  
in even our most  populous  area.
TRANSPORT
NUMBE
R  Action/Description  Comments
20  Enable the rapid shift  to electric  vehicles by 
installing Electric Vehicle (EV) charging points. The Council is pursuing  grant  aid and intends  to invest  its own resources in establishing 
charging points accross the county. A start will be made  in 2020 by investing £465k to 
establish 84 charging points across the county  in the first instance.
21  Prioritise transport investment into cycling, 
walking, trams and public  transport, such as 
electric buses. Welsh Government is certainly encouraging  more plans in relation  to Active  Travel and 
Gwynedd Council, over the years, has been very successful in creating  cycling and walking 
paths across  the County. In terms of public  transport, the Council has not seen  direct 
investment from Welsh Government; however, the TrawsCymru Service has indeed 
improved throughout the County in terms of its quality  and frequency.  Having said that, 
these buses are not yet electric;  plans are being  considered in relation to using hydrogen 
vehicles with  a report  commisioned to consider  the use of hydrogen vehicles for the Sherpa 
bus services in northern  Snowdonia.22  Put in place  Clean Air Zones, with charging if 
needed. This is an issue that should be considered by the Council, but as it does  not have very large 
towns and cities, air quality is not a significant issue, and this may well be unnecessary  at the 
moment. 
23  Reduce car use through measures such as 
promoting car-sharing.Re-regulating bus services  
and constraining road  space. The Council certainly sees  a role for itself in this respect, in encouraging  residents to car 
share, use buses, etc. For the Council's business journeys, we are already encouraging 
officers to reduce these journeys, if possible by reducing their travelling  budgets and 
ensuring that greater use is made  of facilities  such as video conferencing.   
24
 Require all taxis  to be electric through licensing.
 The Council is unaware of any powers it has to enforce taxis to be electric vehicles. In this 
respect, the Council's probable  role it to ensure that charging points are available  across the 
County in order to enable  businesses such as taxi companies and residents  to invest  in 
electric vehicles in the confidence  that they will have a place to charge their cars.   
25
 Deliver a rapid transition of the council’s own  
fleet to electric.
 As noted in number 20, the Council is in the process of installing charging points and in time 
the fleet  vehicles and vans will be replaced with electric  vehicles.   It is an interesting issue  to 
consider in terms of larger vehicles, e.g. bin lorries, gritters,  etc. and the solution  here may 
be hydrogen  vehicles. The Council,  along with other partners, is already considering the 
practicality of this. 
26
 Require deliveries  to the council to be by electric  
vehicles.
 The Council does  not demand that goods deliveries are made by electric vehicles, but the 
hope is that this will become more cost-effective for companies as time goes  on. The Council 
is aware that there  will not be a substantial change in carbon emissions from using  electric  
cars, and there are other, less desirable  environmental side-effects to electric  vehicles. The 
Council is in discussions with electricity  companies in terms of the challenges facing us to 
ensure that there is enough electricity  available when  there are more electric  vehicles on 
our roads.  
27
 Introduce differential charges for parking 
permits or other car related charges.
 Vehicle tax certainly charges a differential  cost for users of vehicles  that pollute  more. 
Currently, it is very difficult to differentiate  between vehicles  in our car parks based on pay 
and display; however we could look  into other situations where we could consider a 
differential fee.   28
 Reduce the need to own and use a car through 
managing developments  in the local plan
 This is opbviously going  to be more  difficult in a rural  area.  Reducing  the need for car 
ownership is a very interesting issue  and innovative  schemes have been developed in at 
least two communities within the County;  in the Ogwen area and in the Abergynolwyn  area,  
where community electric vehicles  are available for hire at a relatively reasonable price for 
use on occasions when people genuinely need  a vehicle.  This may  be one model that the 
Council could influence  and encourage  other  communities to follow.
POWER
NUMBE
R  Action/Description  Comments
29  Identify areas suitable for renewable  energy  in 
the local plan. The process  of assessing the Joint Local Development Plan has included research to assess 
the capacity of the landscape in terms of developments  such as renewable energy  and the 
Plan includes specific policies  relating to renewable energy and sustainable  developments.  
See section 6.2 of the Plan:  
30  Switch street  lighting  to well-designed and well 
directed LED lights. 70% of street lighting  has now been replaced  with LED lights and plans are afoot  to replace 
the remaining  30%. This would mean a reduction of 1,540 tonnes of carbon  emissions after 
the completion  of all work. The Department  will then  consider replacing illuminated  signs.   
An ambitious project to significantly reduce carbon  emissions and energy costs has saved 
Gwynedd Council over  £4 million since  it was established in 2010.  The Council’s Carbon 
Management Plan  has seen a number of improvements across the authority which has led to 
huge reductions in CO2 emissions as well as delivering £4,062,958 in savings.  31  Reduce energy used by the local authority in its 
own estate. 
Now, thanks to a combination of different projects  including installing more  energy-efficient 
lighting in buildings  and street lights; insulation projects; fuel cells  and a number of energy  
saving technologies for IT equipment, its carbon footprint has reduced by a phenomenal 
39.3% during this period. Since 2010, there has been  particular focus on cutting  CO2 emissions 
in Buildings’ energy, which are down  by 43%.32  Require the integration of renewable energy 
such as solar  thermal, PV or heat pumps in local 
authority developments and, as much as 
possible, within private  sector developments. We have already installed PV systems  on 58 of our buildings, in addition to the installation of 
Biomass Boilers in 5 Buildings.
33
 Support the development  of renewable energy  
and energy  storage.
 The Council has already  invested  in electricity generation as noted above. We intend  to 
identify further suitable sites within  the Council's ownership for new proposed  renewable 
energy schemes in order to proceed with  further  investigations for undertaking such 
schemes.  
34
 Oppose fracking and other fossil fuel extraction, 
and where opposition on fracking has been  
overturned, support peaceful protest.  Not applicable.
35
 Divest from fossil fuels  and invest in renewable 
energy projects.  The authority  does not invest its own money in corporate entities.  The Pension  Fund has to 
comply with strict investment  rules  but they have  recently decided to invest 12% of the 
Fund in a Low Carbon  Investment Fund.
WASTE
NUMBE
R  Action/Description  Comments
36  Send zero waste to landfill or incineration.  Since August this year, all of Gwynedd's residual waste  is sent to a waste  treatment site 
(Parc Adfer). Therefore,  nothing is sent to landfill.  The site is in the commissioning phase,  
but when fully operational  it will generate 17 MW of electricity for the national  grid and 
enough power to run the site itself.  
37  Use food waste  according  to the food  waste  
hierarchy of prevent, reuse,  recycle, and ensure 
remaining non-recyclable biodegradable waste 
to generate biogas. 
For seven  years, the GwyriAD anaerobic digestion site has been treating food waste  collected 
from the homes and businesses of Gwynedd.  This local site in Gwynedd treats the food and 
generates 0.5 MW for the National Grid. The site can handle 11,000 tonnes  of food,  with  7,500 
tonnes collected by Gwynedd. We still have room to improve  in order to divert more food as 
only approximately 60% of food is collected. 38  Adopt circular economy waste policies in 
relevant plans and contracts. It is most certain  a Council  priority to have a circular  economy.  
39  Promote community sharing and reuse.  The service  promotes re-use in our recycling centres by working locally with the third sector 
and with the private sector. An innovative plan is being implemented this year on extending 
the materials that can be recycled.  
40
 Ban the use of single-use plastic in council offices 
and premises
 The Council has a policy  on the use of single-use plastics  
INFLUENCING OTHERS
NUMBE
R  Action/Description  Comments
41  Ensure the Sub-national Transport Body strategy 
is in-line with carbon budgets. The Council is represented at a Cabinet Member and Head of Department level on the 
Regional Transportation  Groups for North and Mid Wales. Certainly, the issue of low-carbon 
vehicles and transportation is very high up on the agenda and taken seriously by Welsh 
Government. 
42  Use council memberships of Local Enterprise  
Partnerships to ensure all their decisions  are in-
line with the climate reduction pathway and 
nature restoration plans. There is no LEP in North  wales but the North Wales Economic Ambition Board  has the 
opportunity to invest  in order to facilitate economic growth accross  the region.  One of the 
programmes is the Smart Access to Energy programme which includes a package of projects  
which position North Wales as one of the UK's leading  areas for low carbon  energy  creation 
and production, along with innovative small  scale smart  local energy networks.  Delivering 
these projects  should  ensure that North  Wales has high quality modern  infrastructure in 
order to facilitate sustainable growth  in the low carbon energy sector.  43  Provide particular  support to SME businesses to 
access funds and expertise  for reducing carbon 
pollution. We will need  to investigate the opportunities  that exist for financial  aid. The County Council 
has collaborated with businesses in Gwynedd to encourage less plastic as part of the 'Plastic-
free Towns' scheme. A positive response was received,  e.g. from Bonta Deli and Palace 
Street Pantri,  to cut down on their  plastic use. There is a new  business on Castle Square, The 
Sustainable Weigh,  which is completely plastic-free and sustainable and sets a great  
example to other businesses.  
44  Use influence with schools  and others to ensure 
that meals  are delivered in accordance with the 
official Eatwell Guide on healthy  eating and the 
majority of options on menus are healthy and 
plant-based, with  less and better meat. Buying local is a matter  of high priority for Gwynedd;  reducing food miles is something to 
encourage and having local  and seasonal  produce  is seen as sensible and healthy.   The 
Council's Keeping  Benefits  Local plan tries to maximise the contracts that are awarded  to 
local companies by helping and encoraging them to tender for food  and other contracts  
LAND USE
NUMBE
R  Action/Description  Comments
The Council has prepared a Biodiversity Duty Plan which meets the duty  to sustain 
biodiversity and promote the resilience of ecosystems.   Projects and work programmes are 
being established and implemented in accordance with  the principles of Natural Resources 
Management and an ecosystems mindset.                                                                                             45  Double tree cover on council-owned  land, 
update local planning  strategies to double  tree 
cover across the Local  Authority area, and 
ensure existing trees are properly protected in 
order to store carbon, support nature, improve 
soils and water quality, and aid flood protection  
and urban design. 
The Tir a Môr Llŷn project is an example  of such  a scheme, which combines  habitat 
management, collaboration  with landowners to reduce the pollution that reaches rivers and 
ends up in the seas,  piloting sustainable farming methods and improved  access 
opportunities. The project is innovative as it integrates the work on the land and on the sea, 
thus it is possible to expand and strengthen partnership working across  the Pen Llŷn a'r 
Sarnau SAC.  Link.                                                                                       The Council owns substantial lands, including  woodlands  and lands  that have been identified 
and designated as nature reserves and wildlife sites. Woodlands are important assets for 
recreation but a lack of resources hinders effective management.  Through the Planning 
process and Tree Preservation Orders  (link),  the Council preserves  trees and woodlands of 
biodiversity and landscape value.   
Recently, the Ash Dieback disease has spread to Gwynedd which will lead to the loss of a 
large number  of mature trees, thus having a detrimental impact  on species and the 
landscape's appearance.  In 2020, the Council will prepare an Ash Dieback Action Plan (link) 
in response to the challenge and to prepare for replanting and restoring habitats.  
46  Protect existing local  green spaces, green  belt 
and locally designated nature sites. Green spaces and lands designated as nature reserves and wildlife  sites  are ways to 
reconnect people with nature and they are resources that contribute to the physical and 
mental well-being  of the County's residents.  Nevertheless, it is a challenge to maintain and 
manage them  effectively in the current  financial climate with greater  emphasis being  placed  
on engaging  with organisations within local communities to encourage  them to take 
"ownership" of the lands. The grant-funded Community Woodlands project  has shown  the 
appreciation within communities of their  natural  assets, and the interest they have in caring 
for them. See progress  report.                                          
    The Llŷn Area  of Outstanding Natural  Beauty (AONB) designation enables  the Council to take 
steps to protect and maintain the quality of the landscape and environment and through the 
Sustainable Development Fund, communities and local organisations receive support to 
implement projects that are important to them.   The  Snowdonia National Park  Authority 
also has a key role to play in this respect  of course as it covers a significant part of the 
county. 47  Manage council-owned land and road verges to 
increase biodiversity and drawdown carbon 
pollution, including  through  reduced pesticide 
use and increased planting  of wildflowers. In terms  of managing our own  lands,  cutting grass verges is work that needs to be done in 
order to ensure safety; however, this has been adapted to ensure that biodiversity  is 
protected so far as reasonably possible. In 2020 the Council will start to adapt  their  cutting 
programmes in order to promote  biodiversity  and wild  flowers at the side of our county 
roads.WE are also developing an exciting project in partnership with the Community 
Gardens and Farms Charity which will facilitate communities'  ability to grow indigenous  wild 
flowers to be planted  on our road verges  (subject  to a succesful grant application)
48  Develop new quality green spaces in areas 
where they don’t exist,  particularly in 
neighbourhoods where people are particularly 
vulnerable to heatwaves and/or are deprived of 
nature. Grants become available  occasionally to create green spaces, and Gwynedd Council  does  
indeed take advantage of these. Of course, these spaces also need to be maintained and a 
resource is needed to do it, and this issue would be addressed when  applying  for the grants  
in question.
49
 Produce a nature  and ecosystem  restoration 
plan to reverse  and restore habitats and species  
and ecosystem quality and function.
 There is a need to protect the landscape  of Gwynedd and its special environment. Our eco-
systems are facing substantial challenges, not only from the climate, but also due to disease. 
One disease  that currently exists is Ash Dieback.  CAMPAIGNING
NUMBE
R  Action/Description  Comments
50  Work with other local authorities and allies to 
secure more regulatory  powers, fundraising 
powers and finance  to deliver on our aspirations  
(for example,  as those  identified by Friends of 
the Earth), and join forces with others to push 
for a national climate  action plan that is 
commensurate with the climate  and nature  
emergency. Gwynedd Council  works with many  other bodies to ensure that we care for and protect our 
important environment, and attempt to reduce the impact  on climate change.  As a member 
of the Gwynedd and Anglesey Public  Sector Board  we have established a Climate Change 
Sub Group to assess whether there  are things which  we could as public sector bodies do 
better together and we will also try and influence projects being undertaken at a regional 
level through our membership of the North Wales Economic Ambition Board  and the North 
Wales Leadership Group.  We will continue to do so democratically and will continue  to seek 
resources to ensure that we are able to act alongside others  to reach this important  goal.  APPENDIX 2
-8.7
-16.8-14.5
-19.7
-26.1
-27.3
-29.7
-34.5
-39.32010/11  2011/12  2012/13 2013/14 2014/15 2015/16 2016/17 2017 2018
-45.0-40.0-35.0-30.0-25.0-20.0-15.0-10.0-5.00.0% Change  from the 2005/06 Baeline - All emissions% Change