1  
 
 
 
 
Next Steps to Net Zero  
Carbon Reduction  Plan  
April 20 21 – March 202 6  
2  
FOREWORD  
 
Over the past ten years, Harlow Council has worked to reduce the carbon emissions 
from its own operations, achieving a cumulative 39% reduction on 2014/15 baseline 
emissions during the previous Carbon Management Plan periods. While this is good 
progress, there is still a significant amount of work left, with the most complex and 
costly decisions yet to be taken.  
Tackling climate change is this century’s single most pressing global challenge. How 
that challenge is met by national and local government and internationally will define 
the world in which we all live and will impact the lives of people for generations t o 
come.  
Harlow Council has an opportunity and obligation to demonstrate civic leadership in 
embracing that challenge by charting a course to Net Zero carbon emissions. Getting 
it right is critical to making Harlow an even greater engine for opportunity an d 
prosperity in the East of England.  
Following the UK Government setting the Net Zero target in law in June 2019, it has 
been under a legal duty to do so by 2050 at the latest. The Council unanimously 
declared a Climate Emergency in July 2019.  
Addressing t he Council’s own carbon emissions is critical to safeguarding the 
environment, and ensuring Harlow is a town fit for the future. Since 2011, the Council 
has set out five -yearly carbon reduction targets and made significant progress in 
reducing emissions.  
This report identifies what carbon emission reductions the Council will achieve over 
the 2021 -26 period, and begins the critically important work required to prepare to 
meet Net Zero. It sets out the commitment to achieve Net Zero by 2040.  
To deliver this, the Council will take the following steps:  
- Fitting no fossil fuelled boilers into operational buildings after 2025/26  
- Buying no new carbon emitting vehicles after 202 2/23 
- Achieving Net Zero from its waste service during the lifetime of the next 
contract from 2029  
- Develop ing a broader climate change strategy for the town  
- Working with HTS to help them achiev e Net Zero by 2040  and to  identify a 
potential 12% saving during the lifetime of this Plan . 
 
 
Cllr Alastair Gunn  
Portfolio Holder for Environment   3 WORK TO DATE  
The projects included within the previous two iterations of the Council’s Carbon 
Management Plan have sought to address carbon emissions from generation, building 
infrastructure and some building systems. This has included switching to zero carbon 
electricity tariffs for all operational properties and installing smart meters to better 
manage and monitor energy usage (reducing CO2e emissions by 374 tonnes in  2019 
and 509 tonnes in 2020) , voltage optimisation within buildings to reduce wasted 
energy by ensuring power supplies are received at a lower and more optimised 
voltage (reducing CO2 emissions by  36 tonnes of CO2e per annum), and  housing 
the services that Harlow Council provides more efficiently into fewer buildings 
(reducing CO2 emissions by  406 tonnes CO2e per annum since 2015/16).  
Building fabric improvements to insulation and lighting have also helped to mitigate 
emissions. LED lighting installations within the Civic Centre and Playhouse have 
proved particularly successful and suitable for  replication across other sites.  
TARGETS FOR 2021 – 2026  
Previous Carbon Management Plans have achieved significant reductions in CO2 
emissions through measures commonly termed as ‘low hanging fruit’, with relatively 
little cost to Harlow taxpayers or the  resources of council officers. Eradicating the 
remainder of Harlow Council’s emissions to reach Net Zero will require methodical and 
evidence -based planning , greater financial and operational commitments, and reliance 
on emerging technologies.  
Therefore,  Harlow Council’s target for the 2021 -2026 period will be to reach a 50% 
reduction in CO2 emissions from the 2014/15 2700 tonne baseline. This will mean a 
further reduction of 284 tonnes through the installation of solar panels and LED 
lighting, the replac ement of old gas boilers with more efficient ones, and working with 
HTS to identify further savings.  
This target is achievable and takes into account the current state of development of 
those technologies, which we will rely on in the future to replace res idual emissions 
sources including gas heating and transport fuels. The Council is committed through 
careful planning to making the right choices, at the right time to achieve Net Zero  
whilst protecting hard working Harlow taxpayers from unnecessary costs.  
TARGET FOR ACHIEVEMENT OF NET ZERO  
Until now, Harlow Council had not set a date by which it aspired to achieve Net Zero. 
This report commits the Council to achieving Net Zero by 2040, at the latest. As well 
as focusing on delivering the CO2 emission reduc tions identified for this Carbon 
Management Plan, Harlow Council will begin the forward -looking and longer -term 
work necessary to meet or exceed this final deadline.  4 At present, there are a variety of technologies with the potential to take Harlow to zero  
emissions, but it is not yet clear which of these will work best, and indeed a 
combination may be required. Harlow Council will closely monitor the emerging 
technologies that will facilitate our path to Net Zero, so that we are ready to take full 
advantag e of them when it is appropriate for us to do so.  
Government initiatives related to carbon reduction are currently focusing on 
investment in heat networks and electric vehicle technologies; the largest and most 
complex areas of emissions that this Plan add resses, demonstrating that Harlow is in 
step with the national picture.  
  5 Background and context  
 
Background  
 
1. In 2010, the Council participated in the Carbon Trust’s Local Authority Carbon 
Management Programme which provided the Council with relevant support and 
guidance on carbon reduction. A team of Officers within the Council were involved 
in the Programme which created the Council’s first Carbon Management Plan in 
2011 and resulted in a number of actions being implemented across a spectrum of 
Counc il activities and set a target of reducing operational carbon emissions by 
25% by 2015/16. By 2014/15 this target had already been achieved. A further 
Carbon Management Plan, set in 2015, set out the Council’s strategy for its carbon 
reduction over the fol lowing five year period.  
 
2. In July 2019 a Full Council meeting passed a motion declaring a climate change 
emergency. The motion stated that  
 
“This Council believes that climate change is one of the most significant threats 
facing the world. One of the largest factors contributing to climate change is man -
made emissions, especially those relating to the use of non -sustainable power 
sources. This Council recognises that action must be taken quickly in order to 
prevent climate change from causing irreversi ble damage to the planet. It also 
recognises the numerous social benefits which are brought about by reducing 
greenhouse gas emissions such as better air quality. This Council believes it is still 
possible to restore a safe climate and therefore declares a  climate emergency”  
 
3. The declaration included two overarching principles to  
 
a) Aim to reduce Harlow’s net carbon emissions as far as possible;  
b) Reduce the Council’s carbon footprint at a greater rate than it is already 
committed to doing so.  
 
4. It is now proposed that these principles are replaced by an unambiguous 
target of Harlow Council, as an organisation, achieving Net Zero carbon 
emissions by 2040 . 
 
5. A draft initial Climate Change strategy was approved by Cabinet Overview Working 
Group in August 2019; this identified three main work streams: Property, 
Environment and Community Leadership. The  below actions were completed in 
the 2019/20 financial year:   
 
a) Creation of a program of new tree and hedgerow planting across the town, 
planting 5,100 trees in 2019/20.  
b) A commitment from HTS to move towards the introduction of an electric vehicle 
fleet.  
c) Reaffirmation of its commitment to the Garden Town development’s principles 
of sustainable development and transport, as set out in the Harlow & Gilston 
Garden Town vision statement at the Cabinet meeting of March 2019.  6 d) Eliminated the use of single use plastics in line with the government ban across 
all pu blic council buildings in October 2020, ahead of the national 
implementation date of April 2021.  
 
Context - What is the UK position?  
 
6. In June 2019 Parliament set in law a commitment to reach Net Zero  emissions by 
2050. This is quantified as a reduction of at least 100% on the carbon emission 
levels of 1990. In order to meet this target the UK government is taking a broad 
approach which includes carbon budgeting, investment in green skills and jobs and  
engaging citizens to identify and prioritise actions to achieve Net Zero . 
 
7. Under the Climate Change Act 2008 (the 2008 Act), the Government must set five -
yearly carbon budgets, twelve years in advance, from 2008 to 2050. A carbon 
budget places a restricti on on the total amount of greenhouse gases the UK can 
emit over a 5 -year period. The UK is the first country to set legally binding carbon 
budgets. In 2011 the first ‘Carbon Plan’ was issued which sets out how the 
government will meet the carbon budgets se t from 2008 -2027. The plan includes 
actions to achieve low carbon buildings, transport, industry, energy generation as 
well as actions relating to land use and waste reduction.  
 
8. The UK Government has also set up a Green Investment Bank and has made 
available several tranches of funding designed to boost green jobs and skills. The 
Council is able to make use of a number of these funding schemes, including the 
Public Sector De -carbo nisation Scheme and electric vehicle charging point grants.  
 
9. A citizen’s assembly (Climate Assembly UK) was formed in 2020 and produced a 
report entitled The  Path to Net Zero . The report  shows how a representative 
sample of the population believe the UK should meet its Net Zero  emissions 
commitment with detailed recommendations across ten areas including: how we 
travel; what we eat and how we use the land; what we buy; heat a nd energy use in 
the home; how we generate our electricity; and greenhouse gas removals. 
Parliament will use the report to support its work on scrutinising the Government’s 
climate change policy and progress on the target.  
 
Context - Harlow’s climate chang e strategy  
 
10. The Council’s actions in this Carbon Management Plan will sit underneath a future 
Climate Change Strategy. Within the 2021/22 financial year a broader report will be 
brought forward which will set out a more detailed Climate Change Strategy 
looking at the broader actions the Council will take to minimi se the effects of 
climate change (mitigation) and to help the environment, and those who live in it, to 
cope with the changes Climate Change brings (adaptation).  
 
11. The Councils’ Climate Change Emergency declaration initially focused upon the 
mitigation of climate change through reduction of emissions within the District and 
the carbon footprint of the Council’s own operations. The impact of Climate 
Change on the local environment is not yet wide ly evident, however we will look to 
identify and monitor the effects that Climate Change is already having on the 
District, for example through extreme hot and cold weather events, locali sed 7 flooding or water shortages. Through early monitoring, the adapta tions required to 
the natural and built environment will be fully understood and enacted in good time.  
 
12. As part of this process the Council is a participating in the CDP Cities Climate 
Change Reporting programme from 2021. Disclosing environmental data through 
this process allows the Council to evaluate current performance, specifically in 
relation to adaptation, benchmarking performance against peers and identifying 
areas of opportunity. The first results from this programme will be available in the 
autumn of 2021.  
 
13. This future strategy document will outline how the Council, through use of its own 
powers and through partnership working with others, will achieve a broader 
reduction in carbon emissions across the town beyond what the Council can 
achieve as  an organisation. This will include use of the Council’s planning policies 
such as a revamped Design Guide, the HGGT Sustainability Guide as well as use 
of environmental enforcement powers. It will also include details of measures to 
improve household recy cling across the town. Broader environmental measures 
will also be identified such as encouraging the take up of electric vehicles through 
increasing charge points, an increase in tree planting and a focus on increasing the 
use of forms of sustainable tran sport. By focusing on both mitigation and 
adaptation the Council is seeking to reduce the impact of day to day living on the 
environment beyond that caused by greenhouse gas emissions. Consideration will 
also be given to how Harlow Council can move from ac hieving Net Zero to 
delivering Negative Zero emissions.  
 
14. Climate change mitigation and adaptation actions will be identified under the key 
areas of Property and Staff Contributions, Environment and Transport and 
Community Leadership, and these key areas fo llow through to this Carbon 
Management Plan.  
Harlow’s Principles and Targets  
 
15. Harlow’s baseline for measuring reduction of carbon emissions was 2700 tonnes of 
CO2e. The Council’s previous Carbon Management Plan (2016 -21) set a target of 
reducing this by 25%. By March 2021, carbon emissions had reduced to 1634 
tonnes – a reduction of 39%.  
 
16. The Council will set a target to reach Net Zero  emissions from all of its own 
activities by 2040.  
 
17. For the Carbon Management Plan of 2021 -26 a target of a further 15 .6% reduction 
on the last recorded emissions baseline of 1634 tonnes is suggested, equivalent to 
284 tonnes . This will achieve a 50% reduction from the 2014/15 baseline of 2700 
tonnes . The roll out of LED lighting ac ross Council buildings and the introduction of 
photo -voltaic cells to generate electricity will help to achieve this through reducing 
the emissions caused by transmission of energy consumed, and some return of 
electricity to the grid generated by onsite PV . Many of the ‘quick wins’ in carbon 
reduction have already been secured and further reductions will require substantial 8 investments. The main contributor to this will be a move away from gas fired 
boilers and into sustainable sources of energy.  
 
18. This plan includes the following measures to contribute towards the 50% target : 
 
Action  Tonnes CO2e 
saved per 
annum  % of 2 84 tonne 
savings  
target  
PV panel  installation  1 0.35 
LED lighting installation at 
Civic Centre 
(2021/22)  0.5 0.17 
Boiler replacement at Mead 
Park (2022/23)  74 26 
Boiler replacement at 
Playhouse 
(2022/23)  90 31.6 
Boiler replacement at Latton 
Bush Centre 
(2023/24)  50 17.6 
LED lighting installation for 
Harlow Council 
owned streetlights  2 0.7 
 Potential HTS activities  to 
be agreed  39 13.7 
Total  256.5 tonnes 
CO2e 
savings 
identified  90.3% of savin gs 
target 
identified  
  
19. The above table identifies that a further 2 7.5 tonnes of carbon savings for the 
2021 -26 period remain to be identified – 9.7%. A notable contributor to this will be 
the Civic Centre boiler replacement which has yet to go through a detailed options 
appraisal. Also, o ver the lifetime of a five year plan it will be impossible to identify 
everything at the beginning of the Plan period in a field where  technol ogy changes 
rapidly and further opportunities will be identified as a result. The targets and 
progress towards them will be reviewed on an annual basis.  
 
20. Identifying carbon reduction projects in terms of payback period is a successfully 
adopted approach fo r the Council. The Council’s Environment Reserve was 
established as an ‘Invest to Save’ fund for energy efficiency projects. The use of an 
earmarked reserve enables a clear overview of the savings being achieved and 
ensures that they are fed back into the Fund to enable delivery of future projects . 
 
 
 
 9 Actions – Mitigation and Adaptation  
Strategic Partnerships  
 
21. The Council recogni ses that it has a role to play both in its own right and in 
partnership with others to implement actions and support initiatives that will 
achieve its overriding principles. It is proud of the work already being done with key 
partners and will look to build  upon these as it moves to its Net Zero  emissions 
target:  
 
a) Harlow and Gilston Garden Town:  In June 2021 Harlow Council reaffirmed 
its commitment to the Garden Town development’s principles of sustainable 
development through adoption of the HGGT Sustainabi lity Guide. This has 
now been adopted as a material consideration for planning applications 
across the town and sets clear standards for sustainability in new housing 
and commercial developments.  
b) Harlow Innovation Park: the first two buildings on the Innovation Park, 
Nexus and Arise were both designed to BREEAM ‘Excellent’ standard.  
c) HTS have set out a commitment to transfer its vehicle fleet to a fully electric 
one as soon as the range of vehicles required is available on the market . 
 
Property and Staf f Contributions  
 
22. The Council’s own estate has been the subject of two Carbon Management Plans 
since 2011, the first achieving a reduction of 25% on a 2008 baseline, the second 
a further 25% on a 2014 baseline. A number of significant investments have been 
made in buildings services, alongside behavioral changes and a move to using 
electricity generated from 100% renewable sources.  
 
23. When considering carbon emissions from its own estate, the Council takes into 
consideration those areas which it can measure, a nd affect the levels of change 
required to reduce carbon emissions, including buildings and transport.  
 
24. The Council’s housing stock is considered within two year HECA reports which 
address the energy portion of the carbon footprint of the housing stock, a nd the 
associated issue of fuel poverty. So , as not to double count carbon , these 
emissions are reported separately. The Green Homes Grant Local Authority 
Delivery scheme will be utilised to improve energy efficiency in Council housing 
stock as well as the  Council acting as a conduit for the funding rounds to secure 
funds for properties within Harlow under social housing registered providers and 
for private owner occupiers.  
 
25. Good data management allows effective measurement and quantification of the 
benefi ts of any given project. Data collection for the Council’s carbon footprint 
follows the methodology used since 2011, allowing robust comparison of reduction 
across previous years actions, and future plans to follow.  Data for energy and 
water usage is prov ided on a monthly basis through the Council’s suppliers, with 
gas and electric data provided electronically. Data for waste collection is supplied 
on request from the Council’s waste contractor and transport data is collated 10 through the Human Resources ser vice at the Council, HTS and our waste contract 
partners.  
 
26. Through the work of the Staff Travel Group, Council employees are being 
encouraged to shift to sustainable modes of transport such as cycling and walking. 
However, this only forms a small element of the Council’s transport related 
emissions. Achieving significant reductions in transport emissions will require 
cooperation from the Council’s partners and contractors in how they procure and 
manage their fleet, including HTS Ltd. Every partner or contr actor of the Council is 
encouraged to collate quarterly data on their own carbon emissions and set targets 
for reduction, thereby contributing to the overall Council target to reduce 
emissions . 
 
27. A comparison of the Council’s Co2e emissions for the past 10 years is shown 
below:  
 
 
 
 
 
28. The residual carbon emissions following the previous two Carbon Management 
Plans can be seen below with gas and transport related emissions making up the 
majority.  Natural Gas Electricity
(100%
Renewable for
2019 onwards)Operational
vehicles -
petrolOperational
vehicles -
dieselStaff business
travelVeolia fleet Kier
Harlow/HTS
fleetLPGkg CO2e per unit  2011-12
2012-13
2013-14
2014-15
2015-16
2016-17
2017-18
2018-19
2019-20
2020-2111  
 
29. 42% of emissions for 2020 -21 (1689 tonnes) were from natural gas, most notably 
from gas powered boilers to heat operational buildings. The current gas boiler 
infrastructure for the majority of buildings is at/beyond end of life. Most notable 
examples inclu de the Latton Bush Centre (South Boiler House), Mead Park Depot, 
Harlow Playhouse and Civic Centre. New modular condensing energy efficient 
boilers have already been installed at the Leah Manning Centre and Harlow 
Museum which are seeing some savings.  
 
30. Detailed feasibility studies will be undertaken when boiler replacements are 
required to appraise the most suitable option on a site by site basis . There is no 
one size fits all solution for heat emission reduction and in the short term.  Options 
appraisals have been carried out for replacements at Mead Park (2023/24) and the 
Playhouse (2022/23) , which have highlighted barriers to the use of renewable heat 
sources for these premises. Further options appraisals will need to be conducted 
for the Civic Centre in the next one to two  years with implementation by 2024/25 at 
the latest.  
 
31. The barriers to the use of renewable heat sources currently include poor fabric 
insulation levels in roof, walls and thermal elements, sizing of properties for t he 
power ratings of available technology and the nature of the heat distribution 
systems within these buildings. Installation of new gas appliances at these 
properties is currently likely to be the most cost effective option. This will still 
achieve signif icant savings on emissions due to the improved efficiency new 
installations will provide, but nonetheless tying the properties in to gas heating 
sources for a minimum 10 -15 year period. As technology develops issues of 
building sizing will no longer need t o be considered but investment in building 
fabric and more disruptive and costly changes to distribution systems within 
existing buildings will need to be built into the cost of changing heat sources to 
renewable options; therefore the timing of these chan ges needs to be carefully 
Natural Gas  
42%  
Electricity (100% 
Renewable)  
20%  Operational 
vehicles - petrol  
0% Operational 
vehicles - diesel  
1% Staff business travel  
1% Veolia fleet  
14%  HTS fleet  
21%  LPG 
1% 2020 -21 Carbon Emissions by source  12 considered against changing technologies to achieve best value for money when 
replacing heat generation sources. That said, the Council’s commitment to zero 
emissions by 2040 will mean that no fossil fuelled boilers will be fitted  into 
operational buildings after 2025/26.  
 
32. 38% of emissions in the same period are caused by Council, HTS and Veolia fleet. 
Council fleet emissions, including staff travel, make up just 2% of these emissions, 
with HTS fleet making up 22%, and Veolia 14%. Vehicle technology for vans is 
now at a point that electric vehicles are more commercially available than ever 
before, though concerns remain about range anxiety and suitability for livery. 
However, some smaller vehicles (cars or small vans) should be cons idered for 
replacement to zero emissions in the short term as the technology has developed 
to a more suitable level. For larger vans and HGV’s, a fleet management plan 
should be drafted by the Council/HTS to identify when and how the fleet can be 
replaced with low/zero emitting vehicles. Admittedly, there are some HGV’s and 
tractors that may not be able to achieve zero emissions for some time and so 
carbon offsetting should be considered alongside fleet replacement. HTS will also 
commit to achieving Net Zer o by 2040  and the Council will work with them to 
achieve this . 
 
33. Veolia fleet emissions are particularly challenging to tackle as vehicle technology 
for low/zero emitting refuse trucks is in its early infancy. Until such time that 
technology is developed, these emissions will remain static.  However, efficient 
route mapping for refuse collection rounds, Euro 6 classification for all vehicles and 
carbon offsetting  will all be considered to help . Nevertheless , the Council will set 
an aspiration to delivering N et Zero from the waste service during the lifetime of 
the next contract from 2029.  
 
34. Although the Council benefits from a 100% renewable energy contract for the 
majority of its electricity supplies , the electricity is still delivered through the 
National Grid, which is yet to be fully decarbonised. The energy used does not 
create emissions  but its transportation to buildings through central infrastructure 
creates emissions in itself . Therefore 20% of emissions are st ill attributed to 
electricity usage. Further third party decarbonsation work on infrastructure will 
reduce these emissions, but the Council also has a role to play in increasing use of 
on-site renewable technologies that do not require use of the grid infr astructure for 
transmission of energy to an end use outlet.  
 
  13 ACTION PLAN  
PROPERTY AND STAFF CONTRIBUTIONS  
 
35. The work in the next five years in relation to the Council’s property portfolio will 
focus on the continuation of the rollout of the LED lighting programme, developing 
the use of photovoltaic panels on Council buildings and the upgrades to heating 
boilers in Council buildings. The savings generated by upgrades to the Playhouse, 
Latton Bush and Mead Park buildings are included in this report, with further 
potential savings to be identified as options are developed for the Civic Centre 
heating system.  
 
 
Action  Timescales 
and status  Performance 
measurement
/monitoring  Level of impact  
 
Installing photovoltaic 
panels on all public 
council buildings within 
the next two years.  
  
2022 – work 
underway  No. kWh 
generated 
by panels 
on annual 
basis  Low 1 tonnes of 
CO2e saved per 
annum  
Installing LED lighting 
in the Civic Centre, 
Latton Bush Centre 
and Leah Manning 
Centre  
 2022 – work 
underway  No. kWH 
avoided 
through use 
of LED 
fittings  Low 0.5 tonnes of 
CO2 saved per 
annum  
Re-include 100% 
renewable energy as 
part of energy supply 
contracts renewal for 
electricity  
 2023  Certificate 
of origin for 
all 
renewable 
energy 
generation 
as part of 
Council 
contracts  High - maintains 374 
tonnes per annum 
avoided  
Work with HTS to 
identify carbon 
emission savings from 
operations within a five 
year period.  Summer 
2022  Action Plan 
agreed  Medium - Aim to save 
39 tonnes by 2026  
Boiler upgrade s at 
Mead Park Depo t the 
Playhouse and Latton 
Bush Centre.  2026  No. kWh 
used/ 
avoided 
through use 
of low 
carbon  fuel 
sources  High - 74 tonnes 
saved per annum  14 Action  Timescales 
and status  Level of impact  
 
LED streetlights  
 
 2023/24  Low – 2 tonnes of CO2e saved per 
annum for HDC lighting (NB street 
lighting supply is not via renewable 
energy contract)  
 
  15 Environment and Transport  
 
36. The current and future actions within the Environment and Transport work stream 
are as below – these actions are not currently fully quantified but as transport 
related emissions make up a large proportion of the residual emissions from 
Council operations it is vital to record actions taking place towards identifying 
methods for reducing these. In line with the 2040 target for zero emissions , all 
vehicles purchased by the Council for its own operations will be electric vehicles 
from 2023/24 onwards (saving an average 1 tonne CO2e per vehicle a year).  
 
37. As the emissions are owned not only by the Council but also its partners actions to 
tackle tr ansport emissions have not been approached in previous Carbon 
Management Plans. This plan marks the point at which the Council will tackle 
these emissions head on and some groundwork is required before actions can be 
quantified.  
 
Action  Timescales 
and stat us Performance 
measurement/mon
itoring  Level of impact  
Installing electric 
vehicle charging 
points across all 
Council car parks 
within the next three 
years  
 2021/22 
pending 
Cabinet 
approval  Avoidance of 
petrol/diesel 
mileage for HTS 
and staff 
business travel 
through use of 
electric vehicles  Indirect – will support 
Council, waste and 
HTS fleets move to 
electric vehicles  
Setting up working 
group to develop 
plans for electric car 
charging points in 
residential areas  2021 
pending 
Cabinet 
approval  Avoidance  of 
petrol/diesel 
mileage for HTS 
and staff 
business travel 
through use of 
electric vehicles  None  
Develop and 
implement a Staff 
Travel plan to 
increase use of 
sustainable transport  2022/23  Avoidance of 
petrol/diesel 
mileage for  staff 
business travel 
through use of 
sustainable 
transport 
measures  Moderate –16 tonnes 
per annum  
Complete Energy 
Savings Trust  report 
for Harlow fleet  
 2021/22  Output report   None – monitoring 
report to identify 
impact  
 