1
herefordshire.gov.ukPathway to 
Carbon Neutral
Carbon Management Plan 2020/21-2025/26
Herefordshire Council - heading for 
carbon neutral by 2030   © NASA2Contents
Foreword 3
Executive summary  4
Introduction  5
Declaring a Climate Emergency  6
Our Carbon Footprint  7
Current CO2 emissions  9
Building on success  10
Ways to accelerate carbon reductions  12
What changes are needed  13
Key areas of reductions  14
Carbon descent  15
Time for action  16
Areas of Work  17
The road to neutral  19
Adapting to a changing climate  20
Appendix  213Foreword
“Herefordshire Council is committed to leading local responses 
to the Climate Emergency and achieving our target to become
 carbon neutral by 2030/31.”
Councillor Ellie Chowns & Alistair Neill
Councillor Ellie Chowns
Cabinet Member for Environment
Alistair Neill
Chief Executive Officer, 
Herefordshire Council
Climate change has been placed at the forefront of the agenda by the recent  Intergovernmental  
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) report  stating the implications of a 1.5oC rise  in global 
atmospheric temperatures. The associated impacts are signi ficant for the world in which we 
live, work and play. Coupled with this report was the signi ficant reaction and action by people 
across the world. The UK was no exception with young people and a variety of activist groups 
helping to embed firmly the fact that we are facing a climate emergency.  
Herefordshire Council played an important leadership role in taking on the challenges that lie 
ahead by declaring a target of becoming carbon neutral by 2030/31. 
This is Herefordshire Council’s third Carbon Management Plan. It focusses on the period 
2020/21 – 2025/26, the first part of our plan up to 2030/31 and carbon neutrality.
It draws and builds upon the previous plans with one signi ficant difference – the ulti mate target 
for the Council to become carbon neutral by 2030/31. 
This document is based on extensive evidence, research and analysis into how best to approach 
the challenging target, with a wide variety of key stakeholders having been instrumental  in 
developing and shaping the plan. 
The associated action plan is dynamic and flexible. It will need to evolve constantly as interim 
goals are met, new challenges and opportunities arise and the landscape in which we operate 
changes over time. 
We will work together with  our partners and suppliers  to deliver this goal and we will be actively 
working as a team in this hugely important task, making the Council and the County a better 
place to live, work and play.
4Executive summary
Moving forward to carbon neutral
The infographic below depicts the journey, initiatives, challenges, solutions and possibilities we have 
included as part of our 2020/21 – 2025/26 plan.  
5Introduction
Our contribution to tackling the Climate Emergency
Herefordshire Council has a strong record of local leadership in addressing climate change. Since 
2003, the council has been looking at ways to reduce its carbon footprint and also leading countywide 
carbon reduction. The Council has recently succeeded in achieving its ambitious emission reduction 
target two years early.  
The first carbon management plan, launched in 2011, formalised 
this commitment and brought with it an increased investment in 
environmental and low carbon projects. This continued with the 
development of the second carbon management plan in 2017. By 
this time many of the projects were showing savings and emission 
reductions. These put us ahead of schedule and we exceeded our 
40% emission reduction target two years early.
Our third carbon management plan builds upon and takes 
forward the plans and work as described in the previous carbon 
management plan. This foundation now provides the launch pad 
for attaining the challenging goals set out in this document. 
This document has been designed to set Herefordshire Council on 
a pathway towards carbon neutrality. The associated action plan 
shows in more detail how we plan to move towards achieving our 
2030/31 goal of becoming carbon neutral by aiming for a 75% 
reduction by 2025/26. 
Achieving early gains in reducing our emissions are key success 
factors for making carbon neutrality a reality. Delivering a 
successful management plan requires the council to be realistic in 
our ambitions, creative in our approach and bold in our decision-
making.
Council resolves to set both an organisational and countywide target for carbon neutrality by 2030
6Declaring a Climate Emergency
Executive Response to the Climate Emergency 
Following the unanimous resolution on the 8 March 2019, the council published its executive 
response on the 26 September 2019. The response is summarised below:
a) The executive commits to an accelerated reduction of the council’s own carbon emissions
and the aspiration to become carbon neutral by 2030/31.
b) The executive approves the policy approach of using 100% renewably sourced energy.
On the 1 September 2019 the council switched its electricity supply to 100% renewable energy.
We are  exploring options for renewable gas as part of this plan.
c) The council will work with strategic partners, residents and local organisations to develop a
revised countywide CO2 reduction strategy aspiring for carbon neutrality by 2030.
The Council will be developing a citizen’s panel and countywide action group in 2020/21.
A report will be brought forward this year exploring the different engagement options
including a citizen’s assembly, citizen’s jury, citizen’s panel, youth panel and a public summit in
2020/21 and will explore the benefits and resource requirements of each.
The Council has set up a cross-party task and finish group on climate change to:
•Develop and propose a checklist of criteria to inform strategies, plans and future decisions.
•This checklist will help assess and increase the contribution of policies, strategies and
decisions by reducing emissions and increasing resilience to climate change.
•Work with networks of major partners to develop a joint countywide strategy to meet
carbon neutral by 2030.
d) The council will continue to monitor and publish reports on its performance on carbon reduction
annually and will include future reporting on countywide emissions, which is also monitored
annually. These will be published on the Council’s new Climate and Ecological Emergency
webpages.
e) A members briefing session on climate change was held on 16 July and a full day interactive
workshop was held on the 21 October 2019. This was the start of an ongoing process of
engagement to ensure that members are briefed on emerging local issues affecting the
environment and able to participate in developing actions in response to those issues.
For more information please visit our website:  www.herefordshire.gov.uk/climate
7Our Carbon Footprint
Background to how we calculate our footprint 
We started measuring our carbon footprint in the 2008/09 financial year and have used that as our 
baseline year against which we measure our emission reductions. 
Over the years, the scope of our carbon footprint has remained relatively static although we have seen a reduction in numbers of staff as well as owned buildings during this period. We have included Scope 1 and 2 emissions and some Scope 3 as set out below.
Scope 1 
•Council owned/controlled mobile combustion sources (e.g., petrol and diesel fuel consumed in buses and cars).
•Combustion of fuels in stationary sources (e.g., natural gas, burning oil, gas oil and LPG consumed within
Herefordshire Council buildings).
Scope 2
•Emissions from the generation of purchased electricity, heat or steam that is consumed in the Council’sown or controlled equipment or operations (e.g., buildings and street lighting).
Scope 3
•Business travel (staff mileage, rail travel by Herefordshire Council staff for business purposes) and staff
commuting.
•Electricity, gas, burning oil and LPG consumption in buildings operated by outsourced services for wastemanagement, highways, leisure, cultural services, education (academies) and residential care homes.
•Petrol and diesel consumption by contracted fleet vehicles.
•Fleet and staff mileage undertaken by main outsourced contractors on behalf of Herefordshire Council.
Notable exclusions (also excluded from previous reporting periods): 
•Emissions from Hill and Moor landfill site. Waste emissions are mainly from domestic properties andbusinesses which are represented in the county emission figures rather than the Council’s.
•Fugitive emissions from air-conditioning systems. Fugitive emissions from intentional or unintentionalreleases, e.g., leaks or spills of hydrofluorocarbon (HFC) emissions during the use of refrigeration and airconditioning equipment.
Overview of Green Houses Gas (GHG) Protocol scopes and emissions across the value chain  Source: www.ghgprotocol.org
8Previously we have kept our organisational and operational carbon emission boundaries relatively similar in 
order to compare actual emission reductions over time. However through the development of this plan we 
took the opportunity to broaden this to include sta ff commuting as part of our Scope 3 emissions. Here we 
consider this an important part of our responsibility and so have not only included it going forward, we have also included this retrospectively to the baseline year. 
Our ability to access accurate data over time has also changed, notably with regards schools. Schools have 
gained increasing autonomy over time, with freedom of choice over preferred energy suppliers making accessing accurate and timely data increasingly diﬃcult. 
We use the most up to date, accurate and complete data wherever possible. Occasionally, we are required 
to make assumptions where data is unavailable. We also use the most up to date emission factors which has contributed to lowering our grid-connected electricity emissions in particular (Scope 2). In addition to the delivery of our action plan the national grid emission factor has been falling over the years, driven by the increasing portion of renewable energy being brought into the energy mix of the UK. The table below shows that in September 2019, the UK’s energy mix for electricity reached the point where more energy was being derived from renewables than from fossil-fuels. That is a truly significant change from which we will benefit more as the mix ratio increases in favour of renewables.
Source: Dr Simon Evans, Carbon Brief, 14-Oct-2019
Indirect (Scope 3) emissions form the most significant part of our measured footprint. We have included a number of Scope 3 emissions, although landfill waste emissions have not been previously measured, and are therefore excluded. However, these remain important emissions which we are addressing through activities such as the waste review and the energy from waste plant. These activities will form part of the countywide carbon reduction strategy.
9Current CO2 emissions 
Our latest carbon footprint assessment (2018/19)
We have been measuring our carbon footprint since 2008/09 (baseline year). The table and graph 
below summarise the changes from baseline emissions and show our most recent carbon footprint breakdown by source.  
Herefordshire CouncilBaseline 
2008/09 Financial Year 2018/19% 
Reduction
Scope 1 6,531 4,474 31%
Scope 2 8,517 2,974 65%
Scope 3 13,136 8,671 34%
Total GHG Emissions (tonnes) 28,184 16,119 43%
Target reduction (2018/19) - - 36%
Key
Scope 1 and 2
Scope 3
10Building on success
What we have already achieved 
We have a strong track record of delivering emission reductions and financial savings.
There have been significant reductions in emissions over time against both the target and business as usual 
(BAU) scenarios. The 40% reduction target was exceeded two years early and the current reduction trend sets a solid foundation upon which to aim for carbon neutrality. 
Some examples of successes we have had in reducing our carbon footprint to date include: 
•Improved energy management
•LED street lighting
•LED o ﬃce lighting
•Sensor controls
•Behaviour changes
•Hybrid/electric pool cars
•Active travel initiatives
•Solar PV projects
11LED Street Lighting:
Has delivered a significant 78% reduction in baseline CO2 emissions as well as financial savings, 
reduced light pollution and increased health and safety.
Hybrid and electric pool cars: 
In 2018 the council invested in six hybrid pool cars. In 2020 six electric pool cars and one electric 
van will arrive to further reduce our emissions from business travel. 
2015 Before LED Street Lighting
2017 After LED Street Lighting
12Ways to accelerate carbon reductions
Working towards carbon neutral, we believe that there are seven main themes (areas of work) which 
will form the basis of actions required in order to achieve a sustainable, carbon neutral council. These 
are briefly discussed below.
13What changes are needed 
Changes required across emission sources
Changes are usually interpreted as something completely different from what has gone before. Whilst the 
task that lies ahead is clearly significant, we believe that many of the successes of the past will continue to form the basis for future reductions. 
Whilst there are likely to be some new and innovative ideas and projects coming through due to the speed of 
change in technology, the successes and lessons from previous and current projects will play a critical role in determining our pathway towards carbon neutrality. 
The key focal points for this period of reductions, based on our current carbon emission sources, are shown in 
this hierarchy.
14Key areas of reductions
This diagram shows key areas where we aim to reduce emissions over the coming period.  
It is likely that the emission reducti ons w ill not m atch t his e xactly a s there will b e variation and additional 
projects which may impact in ways we have not planned for and cannot predict at this stage. 
This diagram is indicative a nd the areas o f focus w ill remain flexible as  reductions are  mea sured acr oss a variety 
of interventions and as we continue to seek and develop projects for 2030/31.
Each section of the pie chart represents an area of work, whilst the size represents the percentage of the 
target we have set out in this plan. 
15Carbon descent 
How we predict our CO2 emissions reducing over time
The graph below shows the actual CO2 reductions achieved to date and the projected changes up to 
2030/31, with a target of a 75% reduction on 2008/09 levels, by 2025/26.
We have a high confidence in the early reducti ons; this reduces as ti me goes on as uncertainty increases over 
time. It is important  that this document remains “live and dynamic” with the ability to adjust as time moves 
forward.  Our 2018/19 carbon footprint total was 16,119 tonnes of CO2. Our ultimate aim is to bring this down 
to zero.
Our approach in the first period is to focus on behaviour changes, eﬃciencies, technology and renewable 
energy. Currently, we anticipate that we will be able to reduce emissions (relative to 2008/09 baseline)  by 
75% by 2025/26.  We then have five more years to get to carbon neutral. We believe we will be able to 
reduce our carbon emissions significantly although there are likely to be some residual emissions which we 
will not be able to reduce to zero.
Offsetting and sequestration will have an important role to play in the council achieving carbon neutral and 
we 
will be considering how best to implement this over the coming months. One option will likely be through 
carbon sequestration which is the act of locking away carbon by using methods such as tree planti ng.
16Time for action 
Summary of our action plan up to 2025/26
Development of the acti on plan has been a challenge. Uncertainty plays a signi ficant role in the 
pathway towards a carbon neutral future. Embracing the uncertainty  and acting despite  it is our 
preferred option.
This document has been published during the COVID-19 outbreak. As such we are aware that plans will need 
to evolve, some targets may be met sooner than initially intended whilst others will become more diﬃcult. 
The table below gives an outline of how we intend to meet our 2025/26 target. The areas of work are supported 
by specific activities, many of which are already underway and will be continued, completed and/or ramped 
up over the coming period. To detail our thinking we have provided two further columns. The first column 
shows the theoretical maximum savings available whilst the second column provides a figure which we have a 
high confidence in achieving by 2025/26, whilst still challenging ourselves. 
Area of work Example of planned activitiesEstimated 
Maximum 
Reduction (tCO2)High 
Confidence  
(tCO2)
Renewable 
EnergyPurchase renewable energy -2,138 -1,372
ProjectsEnergy E ﬃciency & Renewable Energy 
programme, pool cars -563 -452
Better WaysOf Working (BWOW)Behaviour change, Staff travel plan, video conferencing, fleet review, property rationalisation-332 -237
Schools & AcademiesPurchase renewable energy, behaviour 
change, energy e ﬃciency, renewable 
energy-4,884 -2,209
ContractsMore sustainable travel and practices adopted -436 -349
PartnersPurchase renewable energy, energy 
eﬃciency programme, behaviour change -2,840 -1,526
Totals -11,193 -6,144
Percentage reduction from baseline -83% -65%
TARGET 2025/26 75%
17Areas of Work
   Purchase Renewable Energy
In January 2020 the council switched its electricity supply to 100% certified 
renewable energy. We are looking into sources of ‘green gas’ meaning all of the council’s energy needs will be met with renewables.
  Energy Efficiency Projects
We have a number of energy e ﬃciency projects planned over the next year, utilising European grant funding 
where we can, to make our own budgets go further. The projects we will be looking to install over the next 12 months include:
•Continue to install solar PV on several council owned buildings where we can match energy
supply from the solar panels to demand.
•LED lighting with advanced controls will continue to be installed across our o ﬃces and other
building including children’s centres.
•More e ﬃcient air handling units and boilers will also be installed where energy savings can
 be realised.
•As new technologies emerge, innovative technologies including battery storage will be considered.
 Better Ways of Working
In March 2020 it was announced that the council would consolidate its o ﬃces from three main o ﬃces 
down to two. This reduction in the number of buildings we operate means we will greatly reduce our energy 
consumption. To achieve this reduction in o ﬃces, our Plough Lane o ﬃce will adopt more flexible working and 
meeting spaces. This versatility of our buildings goes hand in hand with encouraging employees to work from home for one to two days a week where appropriate.
   Schools and Academies
From April 2020 schools who purchase electricity from West Mercia Energy will automatically receive 100% certified renewable electricity for no extra charge. 
In time for the Autumn term the council will release a schools energy resource pack helping schools to audit 
their energy use with pupils and setting out a series of activities that all members of the school can do for free, to help the school save in excess of 10% of their annual fuel bill.
Schools are able to apply to the European grant scheme MarRE run by Herefordshire Council. This scheme 
provides applicants with a grant of up to 50% of the total cost of installing eligible renewable energy technologies. This can include, but is not limited to, solar PV and thermal, wind, heat pumps and biomass. There is more information on our website www.herefordshire.gov.uk/MarRe
Maintained/Community Schools in Herefordshire can apply to the council’s Schools Finance team for an interest 
free loan for the full or partial cost of the installation of energy e ﬃciency measures including renewables such as 
solar. The savings made from these projects can help the school to repay the loan. In the case of solar PV it will entirely repay the loan at which point the school will benefit from their own free renewable energy thereafter.
SolarHydro/
wave
Wind
Herefordshire Council sources of 
renewable electricity 202018   Contracts
The Council has set up a cross-party task and finish group on climate change to:
•Develop and propose a checklist of criteria to inform strategies, plans and future decisions
•This checklist will help assess and increase the contribution of policies, strategies and
decisions by reducing our carbon emissions and increasing resilience to climate change
•Work with networks of major partners to develop a joint countywide strategy to meet net
zero carbon by 2030.
This task and finish group will make recommendations to the general scrutiny committee to ensure all 
strategies, plans and decision going forward properly consider their contribution to the 2030 carbon neutral target. These changes will mean that when new contracts are signed for the provision of services, these operations are giving proper consideration to the overall target of carbon neutral by 2030.
A task and finish group on waste has also been set up. This task and finish group is conducting a strategic 
review of the council’s waste management service. The review will seek to understand future demands, aspirations and policy requirements and consider what changes may be required to our existing service. It will inform future policy development by providing findings and recommendations to the cabinet member for contracts and assets, the wider executive and the waste management team. 
The government’s Resource and Waste Strategy 2018 encourages a move towards a more sustainable circular 
economy, protecting natural resources and maximising the life of materials. In waste this means doing all we 
can to prevent waste, encourage reuse, recycle materials and use what’s left to recover energy. New services to collect food waste and increase recycled material quality are expected. These measures are likely to see a requirement for additional vehicles to collect waste differently from how we do now. This could result in an increase in Scope 3 emissions, however our move to a more circular economy will help reduce use of natural resources and reduce county-wide carbon emissions overall. 
   Partners
In 2015 the council in partnership with Halo installed solar PV on the Hereford and Leominster leisure 
centres. Since this date Halo have undertaken a series of energy e ﬃciency projects to further reduce their 
carbon emissions.
In 2018 Herefordshire Council, in partnership with Balfour Beatty Living Places (BBLP) installed solar panels 
on the Kington depot, the base for many of the working vehicles in the north of the county. In 2019 the 
council installed LED lighting in BBLP’s main o ﬃces in Rotherwas. In 2019 BBLP met their 2020 carbon 
targets a year early. The target was a 51% reduction over the baseline year, 2010.
The council will continue to demonstrate leadership by carrying out the actions outlined in this document. 
In turn we will encourage partners to follow the same actions: to purchase renewable energy, carry out their 
own energy e ﬃciency projects and encourage organisation-wide behaviour change. 
19The road to neutral 
This is the timeline towards our carbon neutral goal
The illustration shows the broad outline of our planned timeline towards our ultimate goal of being a carbon 
neutral council by the end of the 2030/31 financial year. 
20Adapting to a changing climate
We must adapt to the changes 
If all human-induced greenhouse gas emissions stopped today, the climate would continue to change 
for hundreds of years to come. Sea levels would continue to rise for over one thousand years . We need to 
reduce emissions but we must, at the same time, adapt to the changes that are unavoidable.
We know the world’s average temperatures are rising on land and in the oceans too. Seasonal patterns are shifting and there is a measured increase in both the frequency and intensity of extreme weather events.  We have witnessed these events both on the world stage as well as in Herefordshire itself.  We will address adapting to climate change as part of our work, in parallel to reducing emissions.  There is strong evidence to suggest that Herefordshire, being a rural county, is vulnerable to the predicted changes in climate and the associated weather-related impacts. The floods of February 2020 were some of the worst to date and are an example of the “new normal” to which we need to adapt. 
Adaptation to climate change needs to form part of an integrated risk management strategy in order to increase 
our resilience to and mitigate the impacts of severe weather events and the associated human and economic costs. 
The council first explored the need for adaptation in its Local Climate Impacts Profile (LCIP), 2009, which stated: 
“The number of significant weather events is predicted to increase over the next ten years as a result of climate change and Herefordshire Council and the County as a whole needs to develop an increased level of adaptation strategies for events such as flash flooding.” We will be following the National Adaptation Programme (NAP) action priorities of:
•Raising awareness of the need for climate change adaptation.
•Increasing resilience to current climate extremes.
•Taking timely action for long-lead time measures.
•Integrating climate change considerations across our service areas addressing increased risks.
•Leading the countywide approach to adapting to a changing climate and the associated impactsfor Herefordshire.
Adapting to our changing climate is critically important. Whilst not strictly within the scope of this strategy, the council will be including adaptation as part of its approach to addressing the climate emergency both at organisational as well as countywide levels. Further work will be carried out on this issue over the next 12 months.
Victoria Bridge and River Wye, Hereford, February 2020  
© Will Mears
“Intelligence is the ability to adapt to change.” 
Stephen Hawking
21Appendix
How we calculate reductions and confidence
The graph below shows three emission reduction pathways and the estimated percentage reduction from 
our baseline emissions. The 75% reduction on 2008/09 levels is the target for 2025/26, with the other two 
showing what we estimate to be our potential minimum and maximum reductions during this period. The 
target of 75% would equate to reducing our emissions by a further 8,748 tonnes CO2e from 2018/19 levels.
The tables below show the esti mated reduction in tonnes of CO2 per annum and per targeted category area. 
Once again, it is important to note that these figures will change over ti me as actual emission reducti ons are 
recorded and reported. The first table shows the lower (minimum – high confidence) reductions, whilst the 
second show the estimated maximum reductions over the next period to 2025/26
Pathway towards 65% reduction:
2019/20 2020/21 2021/22 2022/23 2023/24 2024/25 2025/26
Partners 0 -180 -315 -537 -493 0 0
Contracts 0 -276 0 0 0 -36 -36
Schools & Academies 0 -1306 0 0 -244 0 -659
BWOW 0 -1 -35 -152 -17 -15 -18
Projects 0 -109 -343 0 0 0 0
Green Energy -933 -539 428* 0 0 0 -328
Pathway towards 83% reduction:
2019/20 2020/21 2021/22 2022/23 2023/24 2024/25 2025/26
Partners 0 -240 -340 -616 -1643 0 0
Contracts 0 -290 0 0 0 -73 -73
Schools & Academies 0 -1374 0 0 -488 0 -3021
BWOW -1 -2 -37 -203 -33 -30 -28
Projects 0 -135 -428 0 0 0 0
Green Energy -933 -539 428* 0 0 0 -1094
*The positive figure under ‘green energy’ in 2021/22 is intended to account for the reduced renewable electricity purchased. This is due to
our energy e ﬃciency projects saving electricity that is already 100% renewable. This is to avoid double counting carbon savings.