Hinckley & Bosworth  
Climate Change Strategy  2020 to 2021   
Scope and Purpose   
The council recognises that we face a climate change emergency and will work both internally and with others to ensure that work takes place to reverse the current trend.
 
This strategy sets out the actions that Hinckley & Bosworth Borough Council (HBBC) will undertake to address the climate change emergency declared in July 2019. These include actions the council can take itself and how the council can lead others to take steps towards addressing the climate crisis through both influencing behaviours and by creating the policy and regulatory framework to ensure others take appropriate steps.   
One of the outcomes of the COVID 19 epidemic has been the positive 
impact on climate change through behaviour change and the reduction in emissions as a result of lock down.  These changes must be capitalised on and behaviour change sustained to continue the positive trends.  Climate change considerations will be a cross cutting theme in the council’s recovery plan and will be reflected in the ongoing work connected to this Climate Change Strategy 
The strategy identifies four priority themes:
 
1. Leadership    
2. Regulation    3. Estate and operations    4. Procurement and finance
 
Vision   
To work towards making HBBC carbon neutral by 2030, taking into account both production and consumption costs, minimising the environmental impacts of our activities and through our leadership role influence and empower others to take similar actions.  
To ensure every decision of the council considers the climate impact.
 
Corporate Plan links   
The Climate Change Strategy supports the Corporate Plan vision of creating great places to live, work and relax through creating clean and attractive places to live and work.
 2Regulation  
We will utilise our regulatory 
powers to ensure that positive change happens.
 What we will do to achieve this:  
n   Minimise the climate impact of new development through our Local Plan   
       policies and development management decisions. 
n   Enforce buildings standards to ensure new builds are meetings their planning  
       permission targets. 
n   Use our housing powers to enforce minimum standards for private sector  
       landlords. 
n   Promote the council’s collective switching initiative to minimise residents’ fuel  
       costs. 
n    Target fuel poor/vulnerable households with energy efficiency measures. 
n   Work with landlords to encourage energy efficiency measures in properties. 
n   Facilitate access to financial assistance to home owners to carry out home   
       energy efficiency measures to their properties. 
n   Review the council house investment priorities to include enhanced energy  
       efficiency measures in the council stock. 
n   Encourage food business to move to plastic free. 
n   Review taxi licence opportunities to encourage use of EV taxis. 
n   Monitor and review air quality across the borough. 
n   Use Environmental Protection and Clean Air Act powers to ensure residents  
       activities are compliant.  
n   Encourage active environments within new housing developments, leading to  
       increased cycling and walking
1Delivery theme                                                                                      Aim
Leadership  
The council will act as leader to 
influence and empower communities, businesses, schools and residents, bringing them together to exchange ideas, develop initiatives and promote climate change activity.
 What we will do to achieve this:  
n  Work with schools to bring together a schools community around climate  
       change and ensure young people’s views are heard and acted on, including         holding a youth summit. 
n  Through our employment and skills taskforce bring best practice together from  
       businesses across the borough.  
n  Work with the BID to develop a low carbon Hinckley town centre and to share        
       best practice with our key rural town centres.  
n  Work with rural parishes on their climate initiatives. 
n  Identify and work with community champions throughout the borough.  
n  Lobby central government and MPs to provide powers and resources to   
       enable support local action.  
n  Support communities through our VCS and partnership structures to provide  
       training and awareness raising.   
n  Introduce an annual award at our Making A Difference Awards for the most  
       innovative and impactful community initiative.  
n  Lead change within the council through climate friendly staff and member  
       initiatives.  
n  Use the council’s communication channels to promote climate change messages  
       to raise awareness and encourage public engagement.  
n  Through the council’s event programme promote waste and plastic reduction.  
n  Promotion of local businesses and shopping to reduce the number of car journeys.  
n  Support the Hinckley Area Foodbank initiative to enable the redistribution of  
       excess food from supermarkets  
n  Support and utilise the county-wide reuse and recycling of furniture and white  
       goods scheme via Worklink. 
n  Work with the county and district councils to progress joint initiatives.
4Procurement and 
Finance  
We will maximise financial opportunities to support climate change work.  
 We will achieve this by:  
n   Ensuring climate change impacts are considered in all procurement activity. 
n   Consider climate change impacts when awarding grants and funding. 
n   Identify external funding opportunities. 
n   Ensure the council’s energy is from sustainable sources. 
n   Ensure council’s investments are placed in environmental and socially   
       responsible investments. 
n   Consider ways of incentivising businesses and homeowners to adopt  
       energy efficiency measures.3Estate and 
Operations  
Through our buildings, vehicles 
and services we will minimise our impact on carbon emissions. We will achieve this by:  
n   Establishing the council’s carbon baseline and monitor council house green  
       house gas emissions and CO2. 
n   Ensure all new policies, strategies and activities are assessed against climate  
       change implications. 
n   Identify climate change champions in each service area of the council. 
n   Review the council’s travel policy and incentivise reduction in energy. 
n   Install EV charging points at car parks and support others in the provision of  
       charging points. 
n   Utilise our land to draw down carbon. 
n   Review existing buildings and estate for additional energy efficiency measures. 
n   Review the council’s fleet to ensure impacts are minimised. 
n   Minimise the use of single use plastic across the council. 
n   Maximise, where appropriate, online transactions. 
n   Use Environmental Protection and Clean Air Act powers to ensure residents  
       activities are compliant. 
n   Promote walking and cycling through our healthy lifestyles work and through  
       the Public Realm Strategy. Delivery theme                                                                                      AimClimate Change: Call for Information
For more information please contact:  
Hinckley & Bosworth Borough Council  
Tel: 01455 238141 
Email: climatechange@hinckley-bosworth.gov.uk  
Web: www.hinckley-bosworth.gov.uk/climatechange
The success of this strategy depends on widespread action by local people, 
alongside the commitment of Hinckley and Bosworth Borough Council and its partners.  
Climate change and its impact is the responsibility of everyone and it very much needs to be at the forefront of everything we do.  
Please help us:   
The council would like to hear about what you, your family, your community, your business or your schools are doing to support reducing the impact of climate change.     
Please let us know your initiatives, however small, by emailing: climatechange@hinckley-bosworth.gov.uk   
You can also feedback on this Strategy by visiting:  
www.hinckley-bosworth.gov.uk/climatesurvey  or emailing: climatechange@hinckley-bosworth.gov.uk
