HORSHAM DISTRICT 
COUNCIL
Carbon Reduction Target Setting 
and Action Plan Support
August 2020
Context01
Footprint Review02
Setting a target03
Action Plan04
Appendices05CONTENTS
Horsham Images provided by Toby Phillips 3 Horsham District Council | IntroductionINTRODUCTION
In June 2019, Horsham District councillors acknowledged in 
a notice of motion strong scientific evidence and growing 
public concern about a wide range of damaging 
environmental matters, including a climate emergency. 
They committed to developing a plan of practical changes 
they can implement to work towards a net zero carbon 
target.
Report Overview: 
As part of delivering that commitment, this work has been 
commissioned by the Carbon Reduction Project Team at 
Horsham District Council to support their carbon reduction 
planning. 
•Chapter 1 provides the context and drivers for action.
•Chapter 2 reviews the Council’s 2018/19 footprint and 
the associated accounting principles.
•Chapter 3 explores different methods for setting a 
carbon reduction target and the implications of each 
approach.
•Chapter 4 provides recommended actions, in line with 
the agreed target, and includes an estimation of cost and 
carbon savings.Objectives:
This will help Horsham District Council to:
1)Identify key emission sources to target action and assess 
what emissions to include in the target.
2)Assess the implications of different target setting 
methods and make an informed and evidence -based 
decision on the most suitable target for the Council.
3)Identify key actions necessary to reach the agreed target 
and use the cost benefit analysis to inform 
implementation.
Scope:
This report is primarily focused on Horsham District 
Council’s own organisational emissions as a starting point 
for encouraging further emission reduction activities in the 
district.
Terminology 
Throughout this report emissions are defined in units of tonnes of carbon 
dioxide (CO2) or carbon dioxide equivalent (CO2e). One tonne of CO2is 
roughly equivalent to:
CO2e allows the comparison and inclusion of other GHGs (e.g. nitrous oxide 
and methane) as well as carbon dioxide. It represents the corresponding 
amount of carbon dioxide that would be required to produce the same level 
of global warming as these other GHGs.Key definitions
The report frequently references the following terms defined below. A full list 
of definitions can be found in Appendix 1. 
Decarbonisation –the process of changing our activities and industries to 
create an economy that sustainably reduces emissions of carbon dioxide. 
‘Carbon neutral’ or ‘net zero’ emissions -These two terms typically mean the 
same thing; while emissions have been reduced overall, residual GHG 
emissions (e.g. those from industry and/or freight transport) are then offset 
through carbon dioxide removal from the atmosphere. See Chapter 3 for 
further discussion. 
Offsetting -Carbon offsetting refers to the purchase of a tradeable unit, 
representing emissions rights or emissions reductions, to balance the climate 
impact of an organisation, activity or individual. Although they can be stored 
and traded like a commodity, they are not material things; offset credits are 
not literally “tonnes of carbon” but stand in for them and are better regarded 
as intangible assets or financial instruments. To act as an offset, units must 
be cancelled to represent a reduction and prevent further trading.
4 Horsham District Council | Navigating the ReportNAVIGATING THE REPORT
40 return trips by car from Horsham to London
1 passenger flying from Gatwick to Chicago
Burning 1 -2 bathtubs’ worth of crude oil
01Context
6 Horsham District Council | Context01 –CONTEXT
CALL TO ACTION
A growing consensus
It is now widely agreed that climate change poses an 
urgent and unprecedented threat and that action is 
required across all aspects of society. The recognition of 
urgency is no longer just the message from environmental 
groups but is now being reiterated across a variety of 
sectors:
•UK Local Authorities: The majority of Local Authorities 
in the UK have now declared a climate emergency, 
including several neighbouring authorities to Horsham. 
•UK Climate Strike action: Fridays for the Future and 
global climate strikes have led to unprecedented levels 
of support for climate action. Over 150 people attended 
a climate strike in Horsham in September last year.
•Increased media profile: The strike action has been 
mirrored in the media with enhanced scrutiny and 
coverage on climate related issues.
•Global Businesses: Nearly 800 companies globally are 
setting Science Based Targets . As part of the lead up to 
COP26, the campaign ‘ Race to Zero ’ was launched across 
businesses, cities and nations. The next few years will be pivotal for climate change 
mitigation. The urgency of the situation is growing as we 
approach planetary tipping points and are held to account 
as a nation against international climate targets. There 
must be a decade of unprecedented and disruptive action if 
we are to limit dangerous temperature rise. 
Dangerous Impacts
UKCP18 is the latest generation of national climate 
projections for the UK which helps to predict the changes 
that will occur in the UK with future climate change. The 
main trends from the projections are increased chance of 
warmer, wetter winters and hotter, drier summers along 
with an increase in the frequency and intensity of 
extremes. 
This is likely to pose a significant economic, social and 
environmental threat to the UK and Horsham. Horsham has 
already experienced significant disruption from extreme 
weather this winter e.g. Storm Ciara in February led to 
West Sussex highways team having to respond to nearly 150 
emergencies in the 24 hours following the storm. 
7 Horsham District Council | ContextThe global disruption and impacts of the COVID -19 pandemic have forced governors, citizens and 
businesses to radically reassess their policy decisions, lifestyles and the ways in which 
they operate.
During the peak of the lockdown in April 2020, scientists observed a global daily emissions 
decrease of around 17% compared to 2019 levels. Nearly half these changes came about due to a 
reduction in surface transport usage brought about by government policies designed to encourage 
citizens to stay at home. The consensus is that the emissions reductions seen are inherently linked 
the economic crisis bought about by government responses to Coronavirus. This reduction is 
temporary and could be reversed in line with any economic recovery, if the right policy measures 
are not put in place to ensure a “Green Recovery”.  
A Green Recovery
The cost of delaying action on the pandemic has been felt in many countries. 
Similarly, decisiveness will be required as we recover from this crisis, responding in a way that is 
centred around the resilience, health and wellbeing of local communities. UN Secretary General 
Antonio Guterres acknowledged this in a statement in April 2020: “…ensuring a future for the 
planet must be a core element in rebuilding society after lockdown measures are lifted”.
To maintain the prospect of meeting the commitments set out in the Paris Agreement, it is 
essential the government policies in response to the economic crisis avoid locking nations into 
carbon intensive pathways, and instead steer economies towards a resilient, green recovery. In 
May 2020 the Committee on Climate Change called for government to use the economic recovery 
as an opportunity to accelerate the shift towards a low -carbon economy. This will stimulate jobs, 
improve future economic resilience, and reduce climate related risks. Business and health
professionals are also making similar calls. 01 –CONTEXT
CLIMATE CHANGE AND COVID -1901 –CONTEXT
COVID 19-MAINTAINING AMBITIONS
8 Horsham District Council | ContextThe ongoing lockdown offers the chance to reflect on the way that we operate as a society. This time also presents the opportuni ty to shift our collective values 
and review the demands of “emergency action” in a climate context. Local and national commitments to emissions reductions have n ot changed as a result of 
the COVID -19 crisis.
What does COVID -19 mean for Horsham District Council’s climate change ambitions? 
On the surface, Coronavirus dominates decision making, and some local authorities have seen resources usually allocated to th e climate emergency shift focus. 
Revenues may also have been effected, and social distancing measures can present barriers to public consultation on climate a ction planning measures. But the 
prospect of a Green Recovery also presents a number of short and long term opportunities for climate action, particularly if decision makers can build on the 
behavioural and economic changes ushered in by our response to the pandemic.  
Local Impacts 
When building the action plan, we have found evidence that the pandemic, and the response to it, presents a number of opportu nities to further embed climate 
action at HDC and in the wider district. These include:
•Homeworking -New restrictions on office working have created a rapid shift in perception of working from home. Further research is needed, but this could 
present a substantial opportunity to reduce impacts associated with office spaces and commuting. Similarly, increased working from home presents an 
opportunity to encourage home retrofits and renewable energy generation. 
•Pedestrianisation & cycle lanes -Some regions are seizing this opportunity to create wider cycle lanes and walking spaces.
•Low employment -The economic challenges ahead are expected lead to record low employment. Gatwick airport, for example, has seen 100s of job losses 
associated with ground staff, baggage handling, and flight staff. Investing in the low carbon economy presents a viable oppor tunity for upskilling and job 
creation. 
•Lobbying National Government -As policy makers shape the economic recovery, local government is in a unique position to influence government policy in 
the pursuit of a green recovery. In turn, this could stimulate low carbon activities across the district.   9 Horsham District Council | Context01 –CONTEXT
PROCESS
Stage 1 -Review of emission 
reduction pathways & targets
See Chapter 2 & 3
Stage 2 -Development of 
Carbon Action Plan
See Chapter 4Commencing in March 2020, Anthesis undertook the work in two closely linked stages:
Footprint review
We undertook a detailed review of the 
existing carbon footprint to assess its 
completeness and suitability for setting 
a climate target. We explored emissions 
“hotspots” and identified areas for 
action, advising on the boundary of your 
target. Peer review & horizon scanning
We have reviewed the carbon target 
landscape to understand how similar 
organisations are approaching their 
target setting, particularly in the 
area local to HDC. We further 
explored your options around setting 
a Science Based Target, which have 
historically been adopted by 
businesses. Technical Review of target options
We have undertaken a full analysis of 
the target options available to you, 
considering: levels of ambition; Scope; 
Reporting criteria; HDC’s ambitions, 
and impact on the wider district.
We conclude with a target 
recommendation. 
Construct “Business as Usual” (BAU) 
Scenario
We constructed a Business as Usual 
scenario to provide a point of 
comparison for HDC in relation to the 
target options and provide an 
indication of the dramatic carbon 
reductions required. Stakeholder engagement & 
workshop
We engaged stakeholders within HDC 
to inform the Action Plan. Initially we 
developed our understanding of HDC’s 
assets, organisation, and any carbon 
reduction initiatives. We then 
conducted an Stakeholder Workshop 
session to provide an opportunity to 
inform, critique and prioritise content 
for the Action Plan. Review of Actions
Having received full stakeholder 
input, we provide a summary of 
recommended carbon actions 
available to HDC. We also 
provide commentary around 
how the council may choose to 
prioritise its actions, and the 
impact of the actions in relation 
to HDC’s broader target.   March 2020July 202002Council Profile 
and Footprint
1102 –COUNCIL 
PROFILE & 
FOOTPRINT
A) COUNCIL 
PROFILEThis report is focussed on the emissions associated with Horsham District Council’s 
own operations. Here we provide a profile of the district council, and an overview of 
its 2018/19 carbon footprint.  
Horsham District Council | Council Profile & Footprint12Horsham District Council | Council Profile & Footprint02 –COUNCIL PROFILE AND FOOTPRINT
HORSHAM DISTRICT COUNCIL PROFILE
Metric Description
Number of staff 460
Fleet size 63 vehicles
Functions / Services •Cars and on -street parking
•Household waste collection and recycling
•Street cleaning
•Planning and building control
•Environmental health
•Parks and countryside
•Providing local culture, leisure and sporting facilities
Building portfolio •Council offices and workshops
•Theatre
•Museum 
•Mixture of commercial and residential propertyThe Council’s 2019 motion relates to reducing the emissions from the council at an 
organisational level, not for the district. Therefore, this report is focused primarily on the 
actions Horsham District Council can undertake within their own operations. 
Horsham District Council is a Second -Tier Authority which shares service provision with 
West Sussex County Council. It is the second largest Local Authority in the County and 
provides over 130 services to local residents.
13 Horsham District Council | Council Profile & Footprint02 –COUNCIL PROFILE AND FOOTPRINT
2018/19 FOOTPRINT RECAP
11
%
Direct emission sources 
refers to building gas 
and fleet SCOPE 1
8%
Indirect emission 
sources include 
purchased electricitySCOPE 2
81%
Other sources produced 
upstream and 
downstreamSCOPE 3Key Findings
The Carbon Trust were commissioned in 2019 to complete a carbon footprint of 
Horsham District Council’s Scope 1, 2 and 3 carbon emissions for the 2018 -19 
financial year. The report is available here. The key findings were as follows: 
•The largest sources of emissions, accounting for 78% comes from leased 
buildings and contracts. 
•The remaining significant sources include gas and electricity used in council 
buildings and council fleet.
•The vast majority of emissions (81%) fall under the Scope 3 category.
Gaps in Data
The Carbon Trust report also outlines any gaps in available data:
•Business travel –data available for staff and leased vehicles 
only.
•Capital goods –data not available. 
•Upstream transportation and distribution –data not available.
•Employee commuting –data not available. 
•Franchises –no franchise available .
•Investments –out of scope.8%5%
0%
9%
0%
69%0%0%9%
18,035 
tCO2e<1%
<1%<1%
1402 –COUNCIL 
PROFILE & 
FOOTPRINT
B) FOOTPRINT 
REVIEWWe have conducted a review of Horsham District Council’s 2018/19 footprint to assess its 
suitability for use in setting a carbon target moving forward. 
In this section we: 
•Define what emissions should be included in the target.
•Assess the completeness of the footprint for basing a long term target on.
•Assess the methodology and data gaps in relation to the SBTicriteria.
•Consider the significance of land owned and managed by the Parks and Countryside team 
in the district.
Horsham District Council | Council Profile & Footprint1502 –COUNCIL PROFILE AND FOOTPRINT
FOOTPRINT REVIEW
Understanding what emissions to include in the target
In measuring a carbon footprint and setting a carbon target, it is 
important to follow internationally accepted accounting standards. The 
GHG Protocol Corporate Standard provides standards and guidance for 
companies and other types of organisations. Following this 
standardised approach increases accuracy and consistency between 
reporting, and reduces costs. 
The GHG Protocol provides the definitions of GHG Scope which 
underpin this reporting. Emissions are pooled into either Scope 1, 
Scope 2, or Scope 3, to separate direct and indirect emissions and help 
organisations to shape policies and targets based on their 
organisational structures and ability to influence. Organisations may 
also further sub -divide emissions within scopes to assist targeting their 
emissions reduction activities. GHG Protocol Definition
Scope 1 Direct GHG emissions occur from sources that are owned or 
controlled by the organisation, for example, emissions from 
combustion in owned or controlled boilers, furnaces, vehicles, 
etc.
Scope 2 Accounts for GHG emissions from the generation of purchased 
electricity consumed by the organisation. Purchased electricity is 
defined as electricity that is purchased or otherwise brought into 
the organisational boundary of the company. Scope 2 emissions 
physically occur at the facility where electricity is generated. 
Scope 3 All other indirect emissions. Scope 3 emissions are a consequence 
of the activities of the organisation, but occur from sources not 
owned or controlled by the organisation. Some examples of scope 
3 activities are extraction and production of purchased materials; 
transportation of purchased fuels; and use of sold products and 
services. 
Horsham District Council | Council Profile & Footprint1602 –COUNCIL PROFILE AND FOOTPRINT
FOOTPRINT REVIEW
Choosing your Scope 3 ambition
Scope 3 is an optional reporting category. Whether you choose to set a target in your Scope 
3 emissions can depend on: 
•The type of climate target you wish to set -when setting a Science Based Target, it is 
mandatory to set a Scope 3 target if your Scope 3 emissions constitute over 40% of your 
emissions. To make this judgement necessitates undertaking a full GHG Inventory.
•Your organisational ambitions -setting a Scope 3 target signals an intent to influence 
activities outside your direct control, in your value chain. This can have a number of 
benefits, including improved supplier performance and reduced costs. 
Setting a boundary & considering your influence
GHG Protocol guidance states that organisations should prioritise emissions reduction 
activities in the value chain where there is the potential to influence GHG reductions.
If an organisation wishes to set a Scope 3 target, it is therefore important to make an 
informed judgement on its boundary. 
Later in this chapter, we further explore your footprint boundary and ability to influence 
your wider value chain. In Chapter 3, we bring these learnings together to provide a target 
recommendation. 
Horsham District Council | Council Profile & Footprint
Contracts
85%Leased 
Buildings
11%
1702 –COUNCIL PROFILE AND FOOTPRINT
FOOTPRINT REVIEW
Data gaps
Alongside reviewing what emissions to include in a target, it is important to assess the quality and completeness of the 
footprint before setting a long -term target and ensure there is transparency in why some emission sources may not be 
included.
Challenges with procurement emissions estimates
During engagement with key stakeholders, an issue was raised with the annual procurement spend totals that had been 
used in the 2018/19 carbon footprint data. Some annual procurement costs were identified as representing the total 
contract value rather than the annual and therefore would be an overestimate. The council will re -calculate emissions from 
this sector and values may change, however the initial target -setting process will be focused on emission sources within 
direct control and most recommendations will still be applicable despite the change in value. This should be updated 
before formally agreeing a target.
SBTi requirements
If the council opt for a more rigorous target setting approach, it is important that it meets certain criteria in line with t he 
Greenhouse Gas Protocol. Some general principles of the science -based target initiative include:
•Organisation -wide scope 1 and 2 emissions should be calculated and no more than 5 percent of their aggregate scope 1 
and 2 emissions from inventory and targets should be excluded. 
•Organisations should calculate emissions from the scope 3 sources at which they have the potential to influence GHG 
reductions but should not exclude any activity that is expected to contribute significantly to their total scope 3 emissions
•The reason why specific operations and sources have been excluded should be disclosed
With the exception of the procurement point above, there are some emissions sources which have been excluded in the 
2018/19 footprint but these are in line with criteria which details how and why data may be included/excluded.
81%
Other sources produced 
upstream and 
downstreamSCOPE 3
Scope 3 total 14,687 tCO2e
Horsham District Council | Council Profile & Footprint1802 –COUNCIL PROFILE AND FOOTPRINT
FOOTPRINT REVIEW
Parks & Countryside
Well managed green space is primarily considered a carbon sink due to its role in sequestering and 
storing carbon. Following the Greenhouse Gas Protocol, the carbon footprint of HDC’s operations 
does not account for the impact of the district’s Parks and Countryside on the wider footprint. In 
this report we provide commentary on the role of the Parks and Countryside in Horsham District 
Council’s control, and their potential contribution to achieving its carbon target. 
Why is this important? 
Carbon offsetting offers a means through which the council can address any “Gap to Target” (i.e. 
residual emissions). Such gaps are often identified when reviewing the impact of a planned set of 
emissions reduction initiatives against a target. In the context of HDC’s Park and Countryside, 
natural climate solutions could serve as options for ‘offsetting’. These include tree and hedgerow 
planting, but also grassland, pasture, heathland and soil management. Undertaking a full 
assessment of your potential for action in this area would be the first step to action . 
In exploring offsetting opportunities, HDC should prioritise those within the boundaries of the 
district (as opposed to out -of-boundary investments which could be more expensive and may be 
harder to justify in terms of public spending). Taking such action also offers several co -benefits in 
the district, including clean water; biodiversity; recreation; water flow regulation and flood 
mitigation. 
Emissions reductions should be prioritised
Offsetting offers great potential for contributing to your net carbon reductions. Nevertheless, for 
reasons of impact, speed and cost, actions which prioritise reduced energy consumption and 
decarbonisation of energy supply should be prioritised. This is explored further in Chapter 4.
Horsham District Council | Council Profile & Footprint
1902 –COUNCIL 
PROFILE & 
FOOTPRINT
C) EMISSIONS 
ANALYSISBuilding on our review of Horsham District Council’s footprint, we have further analysed the 
emissions profile to confirm “hotspots” to target during the Action Plan. Here we: 
•Provide a further review of emissions sources after a “re -jig”, to help focus action 
planning priorities.
•Evaluate the criteria for boundary selection in line with published guidance.
•Assess your footprint in terms of your ability to influence in the district, and outside it.
Horsham District Council | Council Profile & FootprintElectricity
8% Gas
5%
Water
0%
Fleet
9%
Business 
Travel
0%
Contracts
69%Waste
0%Leased 
Buildings
9%
2002 –COUNCIL PROFILE AND FOOTPRINT
EMISSIONS ANALYSIS
Vehicle breakdown tCO2e
Cars 78.5
Electric cars 2.1
Ground maintenance 
vehicles 1.6
Refuse truck 1,369.5
Vans & HGVs 94.0
Grand Total 1,545.8Emissions Source 2018/19
Scope 1 1,983
Gas 735
Fleet 1,248
Scope 2 1,365
Electricity 1,363
EV Fleet 2
Scope 3 14,687
Electricity T&D 116
Gas Upstream 102
Water 21
EV Fleet (T&D) 0
Fleet (WTT) 295
Business Travel 70
Business Travel (WTT) 18
Contracts 12,466
Waste 8
Leased Buildings 1,590
Commuting 316
Grand Total 18,351
Glossary (DEFRA, 2019)
WTT: ‘Well -to-tank (WTT) fuels conversion factors 
should be used to account for the upstream Scope 3 
emissions associated with extraction, refining and 
transportation of the raw fuel sources to an 
organisation’s site (or asset), prior to combustion.’
T&D: ‘Transmission & Distribution (T&D) factors should 
be used to report the Scope 3 emissions associated with 
grid losses (the energy loss that occurs in getting the 
electricity from the power plant to the organisations 
that purchase it).’Footprint re -classification
Anthesis worked with officers to 
further categorise certain 
emissions sources in order to 
directly relate to carbon 
reduction activities in the action 
plan. For example, the data 
behind the fleet estimation was 
re-presented by vehicle type in 
order to more specifically target 
action. The categories have also 
been presented in terms of 
scope (see right)
Data additions
Commuting –Given the increased awareness and opportunities to increase 
working from home at present, an estimate of emissions from commuting 
has been provided in order to allow an estimation of savings related to 
this. 
Method: In the absence of data collected by HDC on staff travel, data from 
the 2018 National Travel Survey was scaled down to Horsham based on the 
number of employees. 2018/19 Commuting:
316 tCO2e 
Horsham District Council | Council Profile & Footprint<1%
<1%<1%2102 –COUNCIL PROFILE AND FOOTPRINT
EMISSIONS ANALYSIS
Accounting boundaries
Why are boundaries important? 
Accounting boundaries can determine where and how HDC exercises their 
influence over emissions. Without appropriate consideration, this could lead to a 
situation where emissions ‘fall between the cracks’ and no party takes account of 
emissions. For example, a tenant states they just rent the building and the 
council states they lease it out, and neither recognise the emissions in Scope 1 
and 2. 
Accounting principles
The Greenhouse Gas Protocol previously mentioned also includes guidance on 
setting organisational boundaries. Setting organisational boundaries is essentially 
the act of determining what is in and what is out of the different scopes. There 
are different methods available (see Box 1, next page) for this because the GHG 
protocol recognises that business operations vary in their legal and organisational 
structure and relationship to other parties. Recommendations
In the 2018/19 footprint, a financial control approach was applied 
to the footprint. 
We recommend when the council begin to construct their latest 
footprint, they:
a)Review whether an operational control approach would be 
more suitable and better represent their influence
b)Seek to make the council’s influence and power of control more 
transparent. 
The GHG protocol advises that the chosen criteria should best 
reflect the organisation’s actual power of control.
Scope 3 emissions present a further challenge in analysing your 
influence as this can be much more diverse. Many Scope 3 sources 
extend beyond your geographic boundary. 
Clearly defining these boundaries is important when justifying the 
scope of any potential target.
Horsham District Council | Council Profile & Footprint2202 –COUNCIL PROFILE AND FOOTPRINT
EMISSIONS ANALYSIS
Leasing 
relationshipDescription*Financial 
ControlOperational 
Control
Council are 
the lessorCouncil still own asset and recognise 
on their balance sheet, but a 3rd 
party operates it✓Explore 
degree of 
influence
Council are 
the lessorAsset no longer recognised as fixed 
asset on the council's balance sheet, 
even though ownership is retained. 
Council are 
the LesseeCouncil do not own the asset or 
recognise on their balance sheet, 
but do operate itExplore 
degree of 
influence
Council are 
the LesseeAsset is recognised as fixed asset on 
the balance sheet (less common) 
and de -recognised from the lessor's, 
even though still a lease✓ ✓Box 1: Accounting approaches 
There are two approaches for consolidating emissions:
Equity -a company accounts for GHG emissions from operations 
according to its share of equity in the operation. It reflects economic 
interest. 
Control -a company accounts for all the GHG emissions from operations 
over which it has control. Control can be defined as either operational or 
financial.
•Operational control –when the organisation has the full authority to 
introduce and implement its operating policies at the operation.
•Financial Control -The company has financial control over the 
operation if the former has the ability to direct the financial and 
operating policies of the latter with a view to gaining economic 
benefits from its activities or if it retains the majority risks and rewards 
of ownership.
See the difference between the two control approaches opposite. 
A ✓implies the emissions would be considered within Scope 1 & 2.
A implies emissions would be considered Scope 3. 
Horsham District Council | Council Profile & Footprint*Financial accounting treatment may be subject to change 2021/22 under IFRS16, which may in -turn impact 
carbon accounting treatment.23Weaker influenceMedium influenceStronger 
influence Direct 
Control02 –COUNCIL PROFILE AND FOOTPRINT
EMISSIONS ANALYSIS
District Footprint  
boundaryOrganisational 
Footprint  
boundaryExploring influence
This chart illustrates that Horsham District Council’s influence is varied and complex across 
the different activities that occur within your own operations and also across the district .
Influence bandings are based on Anthesis’ judgment following discussion with officers, and 
are by no means definitive. The examples that relate to each banding are intended to 
highlight opportunities for HDC to apply their influence in areas or ways previously not fully 
explored (e.g. by using ‘convening power’ and/or policy). 
Influence extends beyond the district boundary, whereby HDC’s demand (and supply) of 
goods and services drive emissions in supply chains around the world. Such emissions are 
referred to as consumption based emissions (relative to the UK produced emissions totals ).
This exercise is of particular value in determining the boundary of any Scope 3 target, 
where your ability to influence is an important consideration. 
Influence Description
Direct Control Emissions sources are directly owned or operationally controlled by the Council.
Stronger Owners and operators of emissions sources are clearly defined but are not directly 
owned or operated by the Council. Emissions relate to council procurement or 
council led activities. Impacts occur inside and outside the boundary.
Medium Emissions sources are also clearly defined, but emissions are associated with 
consumption from transportation, distribution, and losses of energy and fuels 
associated with Direct or Stronger influence activities.
Weaker Outside organisational boundary: Owners and operators of emissions sources are not 
clearly defined, influence limited. To address these emissions it is recommended 
that a district wide target is set. Direct control: e.g. Council 
operated buildings, 
vehicles. Relates to Scope 1 
& 2 emissions. 
Stronger influence: e.g. 
Contracts, leased buildings. 
Note: Can extend beyond 
district boundary. Scope 3. 
Medium influence: e.g. 
Transport & Distribution 
losses, other scope 3 
impacts
Concern: e.g. Other 
emissions in the district, 
outside HDC’s 
organisational boundary
Horsham District Council | Council Profile & Footprint2402 –COUNCIL 
PROFILE & 
FOOTPRINT
D) HORSHAM 
DISTRICT 
PROFILE & 
FOOTPRINTAlthough the district -wide carbon emissions are not the subject of the Council’s 2019 
motion, It is important that the Council’s actions are not carried out in isolation from 
the wider district context. The District’s Corporate Plan 2019 -2023 includes an aim to 
work with partners towards becoming a carbon neutral district. 
Whilst this is out of scope for this report, here we provide a brief overview of 
Horsham District and its emissions profile. The aim is for HDC to lead by example and 
inspire the same level of ambition across the district.
Horsham District Council | Council Profile & Footprint25 Horsham District Council | Council Profile & Footprint02 –COUNCIL PROFILE AND FOOTPRINT
HORSHAM DISTRICT PROFILE
Metric Description
Size 205 mi2
Population 140,000
Households 54,100
Renewable Electricity Generation 108 GWh
Recycling rate 53.5%
Number of businesses/enterprises 7,605Horsham District is situated midway between London and the South Coast 
and stretches between Gatwick Airport and South Downs National Park. It 
consists of 23 market towns and villages with Horsham Town at the 
commercial centre. 
The district is 85% rural and includes several areas of outstanding natural 
beauty. Horsham District is part of the Coast to Capital Local Economic 
Partnership which includes the Gatwick Diamond partnership.
26 Horsham District Council | Council Profile & Footprint02 –COUNCIL PROFILE AND FOOTPRINT
HORSHAM DISTRICT FOOTPRINT
The pie chart (right) shows the SCATTER sub-sector inventory for direct and indirect emissions 
within Horsham District in 2017.
•Agriculture, Forestry and other land use has been excluded as it includes carbon sinks i.e. 
negative emissions. 
•Land use absorbs 92 ktCO2e. However, emissions from livestock mean that there is a still a net 
positive contribution from this sector. 
•The Council’s carbon footprint above accounts for approximately 2% of the District’s carbon 
footprint.31%
4%
12%
8%1%34%4%1% 4%
Residential buildings (31%) Commercial buildings & facilities (4%)
Institutional buildings & facilities (12%) Industrial buildings & facilities (8%)
Agricultural buildings (1%) On-road (34%)
Solid waste disposal (4%) Wastewater (1%)
Industrial process (4%)791 ktCO2e
56%
Buildings
IPPU*Transport
Waste
5
%
3
5%
4
%
*Industrial Process and Product Use03Setting a Target
28 Horsham District Council | Setting a Target03 –SETTING A TARGET
RESULTS SUMMARY
Horsham District Council have publicly acknowledged their ambition to work towards a net zero carbon target, but not yet comm itted to action. Anthesis were 
contracted to review HDC’s footprint and undertake an analysis of 3 types of target options in order to make a recommendation onwhich option to proceed 
with.  
Method
We applied the 3 different target options available 
to assess the most appropriate course of action. 
These target types were:  
•‘Absolute’ Net Zero: 2030 and 2050: A 
target based on a goal of carbon neutrality 
by a set date. Popular with Local 
Authorities.
•Science Based Target Initiative ( SBTi) -
1.5°C and 2 °C: Reduction pathways in line 
with the Paris Climate Agreement. Primarily 
aimed at businesses.
•Tyndall Budget: Target method aimed at 
whole local authority areas. We have scaled 
down to apply to HDC as an organisation. 
We undertook a quantitative analysis of each 
option’s “carbon budget”, and give commentary 
around their criteria and scope. Recommendation
Anthesis recommends setting two targets, addressing 
your Scope 1&2 and your Scope 3 emissions separately.
•Scope 1&2: Apply the Carbon Neutral by 2030 
target
This target option signals a desire to lead, brings HDC in 
line with West Sussex County Council’s ambitions. It 
allows for some contingency against the science if this is 
not met. Setting a highly ambitious target accelerates 
many financial and reputational benefits, and positions 
you well for any future increases to the level of ambition 
required driven either by HDC, or global factors. 
•Scope 3: Set a Carbon Neutral by 2050 target
This will primarily relate to emissions associated with 
Procurement and Leased Buildings. This follows SBTi 
guidelines focus on a significant part of your Scope 3 
emissions that you are best positioned to influence. 
Setting a Scope 3 target offers many benefits both in 
your value chain and in the wider district. Key Next Steps
The council should look to formally 
approve the target, before engaging 
the public through an awareness 
campaign. 
Our Climate Action Plan highlights 
carbon reduction opportunities 
available in achieving the target, and 
will help in prioritising actions. 
HDC may wish to explore improved 
data management protocols 
particularly around your Scope 3 
emissions, to improve confidence in 
reporting and monitoring against the 
target. However, we do not believe 
that this will substantially impact the 
target choice or proposed rationale.  1
2
329Horsham District Council opted not to select a target date when they noted a climate 
emergency. Instead, they have chosen to review the different options available for 
setting a target and the implications of each.
In this section we cover the wider context for setting a target, including relevant 
policy, key considerations and the approaches available to HDC. 03 –SETTING A 
TARGET
A) INTRODUCTION3003 –SETTING A TARGET
CONTEXT
National picture
Over two -thirds of District, County, Unitary & Metropolitan Councils in the UK have 
now declared a Climate Emergency. Based on a full list of councils that have 
declared, the majority have set a target date of 2030 or earlier and around 70 have 
not officially set a target date. The targets span both Local Authorities as 
organisations and Local Authorities in terms of the area within their boundary.
Available methods
Whilst there are methods in place for setting targets for businesses and methods for 
setting district -wide targets, there is no sector -specific mechanism in place for 
setting a target for HDC’s own organisation and operations. Therefore, this chapter 
will apply the different approaches available to assess the most appropriate options 
for HDC.  
Aims: 
•Identify a suitable emissions reduction pathway and understand the high level 
implications of different target dates and reduction pathways.
•Obtain a sense of the ambition and scale of the challenge associated with a 
science -based target and other reduction pathways. 
•Inform the development of a carbon reduction plan in Chapter 4.
Horsham District Council | Setting a Target3103 –SETTING A TARGET
POLICY CONTEXT
The Climate Change Act 2008 introduced a legally binding target for the UK to reduce greenhouse gases by 80% by 2050 against a 1990 
baseline. In June 2019, the target was updated to reach Net Zero by 2050 . The Paris Agreement set the international target to limit global temperature rise to well below 2 °C with the aim of 1.5 °C  above pre -
industrial levels. The follow up report from the IPCC stated that this requires a reduction in GHG emissions by 45% by 2030 .
As part of the Paris Agreement, the EU and its member states committed to a minimum of 40% reduction in emissions by 2030. In
December 2019, the EU agreed to set a target of becoming carbon neutral by 2050 . 
In June 2019, as part of their acknowledgement of a climate emergency, Horsham District Council committed to “…developing and
auditing the council’s activities to see what further practical changes, in the form of a plan, we can implement to reflect b est
environmental practice and work towards a zero carbon target.”In February 2019, West Sussex County Council declared a Climate Emergency and pledged to make the county carbon neutral by 2030
including both production and consumption emissions. They also committed to working with other councils to limit global warmi ng to less 
than 1.5 °C. 
Horsham District Council | Setting a Target3203 –SETTING A TARGET
WHAT DOES CARBON NEUTRAL MEAN?
Generally speaking, ‘carbon neutral’ or ‘net zero’ typically mean the same thing: That some 
carbon/GHG emissions remain but are then ‘netted off’ or ‘offset’ through carbon dioxide removal. 
Such removal may occur due to Negative Emissions Technologies (NETs) such as geo -sequestration or 
biomass energy with carbon capture and storage, or, natural sequestration via means such as 
afforestation. The boundary of the carbon neutrality target is important as this defines what 
activities and greenhouse gases are in scope for reduction and/or off -setting, if such a claim is to 
be made. 
Discussion of net zero is linked to offsetting. It may be possible for the Council to attain certified 
‘Carbon Neutrality’ status (i.e. Under PAS 2060), using local offsets. However this would require 
further investigation to understand if the cost, timings and carbon savings would be feasible and/or 
the best use of public money relative to other un -certified options. 
Further options for offsetting are explored in Chapter 4 as part of the carbon reduction plan. 
Case Study: Cheshire East Council
As part of their climate emergency declaration, Cheshire East committed to becoming carbon neutral in their own operations 
by 2025. Their Climate Change Action Plan included an assessment of what it means for a local council to be carbon neutral. 
This considered key factors such as:
i.Likelihood of requiring offsets 
ii.The scope and boundary of neutrality 
iii.The scope and boundary of offsetting 
iv.The cost of offsetting vs other low carbon investments 
v.The value that certified ‘Carbon Neutral’ status offers the public
CO2
EMISSIONSCO2
ABSORBED
Horsham District Council | Setting a Target3303 –SETTING A TARGET
THE IMPORTANCE OF 1.5°C AND 2 °C 
The difference between a 1.5 vs 2 degree worldImpacts of 1.5 °C vs 2°C of warming
In response to the targets outlined in the Paris Agreement, the IPPC published a 
Special Report into Global Warming of 1.5 °C to explore the associated impacts and 
emission pathways.
•The global climate has already warmed 1 °C relative to pre -industrial levels –
There is already evidence that this change in climate relative to the pre -industrial 
period has increased the magnitude and frequency of impacts on both natural and 
human systems.
•There will still be impacts at 1.5 °C –Although 1.5 °C is set as the higher 
ambition target of the Paris Agreement, there will still be climate impacts at this 
level of warming. Every fraction of warming above this, increases the likelihood of 
more dangerous impacts and the risk of passing planetary tipping points 
(irreversible change).
•Half a degree matters and it matters more for some –Part of the report assesses 
the significance of meeting a 1.5 °C target versus a 2 °C target. Although 0.5 °C 
seems like a small increase, this translates into robust changes in the earth 
system which will disproportionately affect some parts of the world. 
Reaching 1.5 °C 
The challenge of keeping global warming to 1.5 °Cis becoming increasingly difficult 
with each year of insufficient action. The most recent Emissions Gap Report
emphasises that we are on the brink of missing this target. It is now assumed that 
1.5°C will not be achievable without the use of Negative Emissions Technologies 
(NETs) operating at a global scale. However, the development of NETs remains 
highly speculative and uncertain.
+ 0.1 m 
 of sea level rise 
 exposing an additional 
10 million people to the related risks
Increase in vector
 -
borne diseases such as 
Malaria and Dengue
Coral reefs projected to decline >99% in with 
2
°
C warming
420 million fewer people being frequently 
exposed to extreme heatwaves
Ice
-
free summers in the Arctic every 10 years 
in a 2
 °
C world versus every 100 years in a 
1.5
°
C world
Horsham District Council | Setting a Target3403 –SETTING A TARGET
THINKING IN TERMS OF BUDGETS
It is important when evaluating the most appropriate targets for 
Horsham that the overall carbon budget as well the target date is 
considered. 
Emissions now mean impacts later
The most crucial element of this approach is understanding the 
importance of cumulative carbon emissions. Once emitted, carbon 
dioxide remains in the atmosphere for many decades, contributing to 
increasing the average global temperature. The carbon budget does not 
reset; it represents a fixed upper limit to emissions. 
This is analogous to a monthly payday cheque, y oucan spend it all on 
the first day after getting paid, or you can stretch it out over the 
course of the month and beyond; but once it is spent there is no budget 
left.
This means that the year that Horsham District Council becomes 
zero-carbon is considerably less important than the annual 
reductions rate of emissions. Hypothetical Pathway 
Carbon Budgets
1,995 tCO2
3,500 tCO2
4,550 tCO2
Target dateAlthough all three of these hypothetical pathways reach zero carbon by the 
same target date, the cumulative emissions or carbon budget associated with 
each pathway is significantly different. 
1000
tCO2Carbon Budget: The allowed cumulative total of emissions over a 
period of years which ensures temperature change remains below 
dangerous levels -The Tyndall Centre for Climate Change Research. Example:
Horsham District Council | Setting a Target3503 –SETTING A TARGET
TARGET OPTIONS
Absolute TargetsTarget 1
This analysis is based on 
aligning with similar targets 
set nationally and 
regionally. It assumes a 
linear reduction to a 
specific target date.Science Based TargetsTarget 2
This applies the approach 
from the Science -Based 
Targets initiative for 
businesses to support 
alignment with the Paris 
Agreement targets.Tyndall pathwayTarget 3
Another type of target 
aimed at supporting the 
Paris Agreement goals. This 
is aimed at an area -wide 
scale but has been applied 
to HDC for this analysis. Approach 
We have reviewed 3 types of target and compared these against a ‘do nothing extra’ scenario also referred to as the ‘Business asUsual’. This chapter 
will cover the context, methodology and implications of these three target setting approaches (outlined below). The target op tions have been initially 
applied to HDC’s Scope 1 and 2 emissions only, as this is within their direct control. Further options for a Scope 3 target a re outlined later in the 
chapter.
Business as UsualReference case
This pathway is included to 
provide perspective on the 
scale of other targets. It 
represents the likely 
pathway should there be no 
further action from HDC.
Horsham District Council | Setting a Target3603 –SETTING A TARGET 
BAU PATHWAY
Business as 
Usual2025 
emissions 
tCO2e2030 
emissions 
tCO2e2050 
emissions 
tCO2eTotal carbon 
budget at 
2050
Combined S1&2 2,782 2,611 2,194
82,988 Total % reduction 
from 201817% 22% 34% - 500 1,000 1,500 2,000 2,500 3,000 3,500
2018
2020
2022
2024
2026
2028
2030
2032
2034
2036
2038
2040
2042
2044
2046
2048
2050BAU
Introduction
A business as usual (BAU) pathway has also been constructed to serve as a 
reference case and provide perspective on the scale of ambition and 
reductions necessary to meet the different types of targets.
Method
The business as usual scenario represents a scenario where the council do not 
take any further action and just allow the national grid to decarbonise (in line 
with national requirements). Reductions reflect BEIS Energy and Emissions 
Projections. 
Based on stakeholder engagement with key offices from the council, there 
were no planned projects with sufficient data to be included in the Scope 1 
and 2 BAU. No forecasted growth in the Council has been included in this 
projection.
Horsham District Council | Setting a Target3703 –SETTING A 
TARGET
B) ABSOLUTE 
LINEAR 
REDUCTIONSIntroduction to 2030 and 2050 targets
An absolute reduction target is based on achieving a set reduction in emissions by a given 
date. This type of target is commonly set by Local Authorities but varies in the date, reduction 
pathway, scope and boundary of emissions.
This approach would allow Horsham District Council to align with either national or 
regional targets. 
Horsham District Council | Setting a Target3803 –SETTING A TARGET
ABSOLUTE TARGETS -INTRODUCTION
UK 2050 Target
In 2019, the UK was the first major economy to pass a legally binding target of reducing all 
greenhouse gas emissions to net zero by 2050. This was based on the recommendations of 
the Committee on Climate Change who argued that this would constitute the UK’s highest 
possible ambition and would meet the UK’s obligations under the Paris Agreement.West Sussex 2030 Target
West Sussex County Council have noted a Climate 
Emergency and pledged to make the County Council 
carbon neutral by 2030 including both production and 
consumption emissions. The motion did not include details 
of the pathway that will be taken to achieve this.
A number of other authorities in the county have also set 
absolute reduction targets for various dates:Two absolute reduction target options have been included to assess the implications of aligning 
with a national level target or a county level target. 
Context 
A common type of target set by Local Authorities has been an absolute reduction target, often 
in the form of a target date for carbon neutrality. The dates set for these range from 2025 to 
2050 and have been applied both to organisational emissions and area -wide emissions.
This approach is based on selecting a year for net zero, rather than considering a carbon 
budget (see page "Thinking in terms of budgets"). This means this approach is open to 
possibility of emissions only being reduced as the target year approaches, not in the short 
term. Due the cumulative nature of CO2in the atmosphere, any 'over -budget' years are 
effectively carried forward. This could result in emissions exceeding Horsham’s fair 
contribution to the Paris Agreement targets.
Criteria
There is no criteria in place for setting an absolute reduction target or in the monitoring and 
reporting of it. The process and selection of a date is at the discretion of the Local Authority.Council Climate Emergency Commitment
Adur and Worthing 
CouncilsCarbon Neutral by 2030
Arun District Council Declared
Chichester District 
CouncilInitial action plan states 10% 
reduction until 2025
Crawley Borough 
CouncilReduce emissions 45% by 2030 
and to zero by 2050
Mid Sussex District 
CouncilClimate emergency noted and 
support for government 2050 
target
Horsham District Council | Setting a Target3903 –SETTING A TARGET
ABSOLUTE TARGETS -ANALYSIS
Carbon Neutral 
20302025 
emissions 
tCO2e2030 
emissions 
tCO2e2050 
emissions 
tCO2eTotal carbon 
budget at 
2050
Combined S1&2 1,395 0 0
21,762Total % reduction 
from 201858% 100% 100%Carbon Neutral 
20502025 
emissions 
tCO2e2030 
emissions 
tCO2e2050 
emissions 
tCO2eTotal carbon 
budget at 
2050
Combined S1&2 2,616 2,093 0
55,242Total % reduction 
from 201822% 37% 100%Method
This approach has taken the national and regional targets for carbon 
neutrality and applied them to the Horsham footprint. There is limited 
information on the pathways to achieve these targets so the emissions 
pathways for Horsham have been assumed to decrease linearly until net 
zero is reached. Therefore, the same reductions in emissions are 
expected on a annual basis and emissions are expected to remain at 
net zero once this has been reached.
Horsham District Council | Setting a TargetCarbon Neutral 
20402025 
emissions 
tCO2e2030 
emissions 
tCO2e2050 
emissions 
tCO2eTotal carbon 
budget at 
2050
Combined S1&2 2,283 1,522 0
38,502Total % reduction 
from 201832% 55% 100% - 500 1,000 1,500 2,000 2,500 3,000 3,500
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
2029
2030
2031
2032
2033
2034
2035
2036
2037
2038
2039
2040
2041
2042
2043
2044
2045
2046
2047
2048
2049
2050tCO2eZero carbon 2030
Zero carbon 2040
Zero carbon 2050
This target setting approach could be applied to any chosen year, for 
instance a ‘net zero by 2040’ pathway is included below.4003 –SETTING A TARGET
ABSOLUTE TARGETS -SUMMARY
Advantages
•Simple to understand
•It is a similar approach to neighbouring and other local authorities 
•It would align with either national or regional goals
•No criteria associated with this target 
Disadvantages
•2030 target is not based on scientific analysis of global emissions pathways associated with 
the Paris Agreement targets. 
•If a carbon budget is not considered then the date alone does not indicate the emissions 
pathway. 
•Lack of criteria and scientific grounding means it is less rigorous and more likely to be 
subject to scrutiny. 
•Less guidance and systems in place for reporting and accounting for emissions.
•It would become increasingly difficult to achieve the same magnitude of reductions every 
year as target date approaches.
Relationship to district 
•No set relationship to district wide goals but the council could adopt a similar district wide 
target.
These two targets offer the most flexibility in how emissions reductions would be achieved. 
Although these types of target are common, they may be subject to scrutiny if they are not 
grounded in rigorous science or subject to reporting and accounting guidance. 
Horsham District Council | Setting a Target
4103 –SETTING A 
TARGET
C) SCIENCE 
BASED TARGETSIntroduction to SBTs
The Science Based Targets initiative (SBTi) is a partnership between CDP , UN Global Compact, 
WRI and WWF , with a stated goal to help “companies determine how much they must cut 
emissions to prevent the worst impacts of climate change.”  Targets adopted by organisations 
to reduce GHG emissions are considered “science -based” if they are in line with the level of 
decarbonisation required to keep global temperature increase below 2 °C compared to pre -
industrial temperatures, as described in the Assessment Reports of the Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change.
This approach would allow Horsham District Council to align its emission reduction 
activities with the international Paris Agreement targets.
Horsham District Council | Setting a Target4203 –SETTING A TARGET 
SCIENCE BASED TARGETS –INTRODUCTION
This target option was originally suggested in the 2019 carbon footprint report and the council were interested in 
reviewing this as a more complex and scientifically based approach to selecting a carbon reduction pathway. 
SBT and Local Authorities
The SBTi is aimed at private sector organisations. The initiative, at present, does not accept SBT commitments from 
Local Authorities which means that if a SBT is set by Horsham District Council it will not be formally recognised by 
the SBTi. However, this does not stop the methods of SBTs being applied to Horsham’s target setting process and 
aligning with their principles and robust criteria could still be beneficial. Therefore, where appropriate methods 
exist, they have been applied to Horsham District Council’s footprint.
Criteria
The SBTi comes with a set of rigorous criteria that must be met by organisations in order for them to be recognised . 
The full criteria is available from https://sciencebasedtargets.org/ but below are some of the key aspects that 
could be applied to Horsham. 
•Boundary: Organisation -wide Scope 1 and Scope 2. Companies should complete a Scope 3 screening; An 
ambitious and measurable Scope 3 target with a clear time -frame is also required when Scope 3 emissions cover 
a significant portion (greater than 40% of total emissions) of an organisation’s overall emissions. Scope 3 targets 
must cover at least two -thirds of Scope 3 emissions.
•Timeframe : Minimum of 5 years, maximum of 15 years. However, organisations are still encouraged to set long 
term targets.
•Level of ambition: At a minimum, consistent with the level of decarbonisation required to keep global 
temperature increase below 2 °C compared to pre -industrial temperatures .
•Reporting: The organisation will disclose company -wide GHG emissions inventory on an annual basis.
•Offsetting: The use of offsets is not counted as reductions toward the progress of organisation’s science -based 
targets.Case Study: SSE PLC
SSE recently set a science -based 
target as part of the SBTI. Their 
commitments are as follows:  
•reduce scope 1 GHG emissions 
60% per gCO2e/kWh by 2030 from 
a 2018 base year. 
•reduce absolute scope 1 and 2 
GHG emissions 40% by 2030 from 
a 2018 base year. 
•50% of its suppliers by spend will 
have a science -based targets by 
2024. 
•reduce absolute GHG emissions 
from use of products sold 50% by 
2034 from a 2018 base year.
Case Study: TESCO
Tesco committed to reduce its
direct (scope 1) and indirect (scope 
2) greenhouse gas emissions by 60% 
by 2025, using a 2015 base -year. 
Tesco also committed to reduce its 
scope 3 GHG emissions by 17% by 
2030, using a 2015 base -year. 
Horsham District Council | Setting a Target4303 –SETTING A TARGET
SCIENCE BASED TARGETS -ANALYSIS
Method
There are 3 main methods used for calculating SBTs, which are listed below:
•Sector -based approach -Based on sector -specific carbon budgets determined by 
mitigation/ technology options and activity projections.
•Absolute -based approach -Based on absolute emissions reductions determined in 
climate reports (e.g. 49 -95% below 2010 levels).
•Economic -based approach -Based on the average emissions reductions determined 
in climate reports per projected economic output (49 -95% below 2010 levels).
No sector -based approach has been developed for a local government sector and given 
that the economic based approach is more suited to private sector companies, the 
absolute based approach has been applied. To do this, the SBTi target setting tool was 
used for HDC’s Scope 1 and 2 emissions. SBT are set between 5 -15 years, however the 
trend in reductions has been extended to 2050 in order to demonstrate the results of a 
continued SBT approach.
How does this relate to the Paris Agreement?
The Paris Agreement temperature targets are translated into an associated greenhouse 
gas budget and emissions pathway. There is no one individual emissions pathway 
associated with the temperature targets and scenarios may differ based on 
assumptions about population, policies and socio -economic factors. Therefore, the 
SBTi scenarios are drawn from over 400 peer reviewed pathways. 
The next stage is allocating the budget associated with this pathway between 
organisations. For this target calculation, a contraction approach has been applied 
which means all organisations reduce their absolute emissions at the same rate, 
regardless of their current and historical emissions. - 500 1,000 1,500 2,000 2,500 3,000 3,500
2018
2020
2022
2024
2026
2028
2030
2032
2034
2036
2038
2040
2042
2044
2046
2048
2050tCO2eAbs. Cntr. WB2C Scope 1 &
2 Emissions
Abs. Cntr. 1.5C Scope 1 &
2 Emissions
Absolute 
Contraction –
1.5 °C2025 
emission
s tCO2e2030 
emission
s tCO2e2050 
emissions 
tCO2eTotal carbon 
budget at 
2050
Combined S1&2 2,364 1,661 0
41,542Total % reduction 
from 201829% 50% 100%
Absolute 
Contraction –
well below 2 °C2025 
emission
s tCO2e2030 
emissions 
tCO2e2050 
emissions 
tCO2eTotal carbon 
budget at 
2050
Combined S1&2 2,762 2,344 670
66,290Total % reduction 
from 201818% 30% 80%
Horsham District Council | Setting a Target4403 –SETTING A TARGET
SCIENCE BASED TARGETS -SUMMARY
Advantages
•Based on robust scientific methodology and in line with good practice internationally. 
•Alignment with international climate targets
•Structures in place to guide reporting and monitoring
•Accompanying guidance on setting scope 3 target
Disadvantages
•Not aimed at local authorities and unable to submit commitment for formal certification. HDC 
would have to wait for SBTito accept commitments from local governments.
•Only short term -5-15 year target.
•Rigorous criteria in place e.g. If strictly following this method, offsets would not be permitted 
which would mean carbon neutrality would not be achievable and contradict the corporate plan.
•It would become increasingly difficult to achieve the same magnitude of reductions every year as 
target date approaches.
•More complex to understand.
Relationship to district 
•At present, there is no equivalent SBTifor district -wide target setting. 
Adopting a more complex pathway does not necessarily mean it is more ambitious than the linear 
reductions previously outlined. The merits of this approach is that it is rooted in a robust scientific 
methodology and so would be viewed as more credible. However, it is not aimed at local authorities 
and the rigorous criteria that come with this target must be considered by the council in how they 
would achieve such a target. Given that the 2 °C warming is equivalent to a 66% probability of 
keeping temperature rise below this limit, alongside the lack of progress that is currently being seen 
towards Paris Agreement targets, it is recommended that the 1.5 °C is chosen over 2 °C as the 
annual reductions may not achieve this temperature target.
Horsham District Council | Setting a Target4503 –SETTING A 
TARGET
D) TYNDALL 
CARBON BUDGETIntroduction to the Tyndall Budget
The Tyndall Centre for Climate Change Research, based at the University of Manchester, have 
translated the Paris Agreement targets of limiting temperature change below 2 °C into a fixed 
emissions ‘budget’ for each local authority. Whilst this is a target based on science, it differs 
from the SBTi in that it’s primary purpose is to inform ambition at a district wide scale, not 
organisational. The Tyndall Centre approach also incorporates principles of equity in the Paris 
Agreement by allocating a smaller budget to developed country parties. 
The Tyndall Centre carbon budget would allow Horsham District Council to lead the way for 
the district by ‘making its faircontribution’ towards meeting international targets.
Horsham District Council | Setting a Target4603 –SETTING A TARGET
TYNDALL BUDGET -INTRODUCTION
Global “well below” 2 °C emissions budget
Global energy -only emissions budgetGlobal LULUCF & 
cement 
processing
Rest of the world energy -only emissions 
budget (c. 99.4%)UK emissions budget (c. 
0.6%)
UK 
aviation 
& 
shipping3UK energy -
only budget
Horsham 
energy -
only 
budgetHorsham 
LULUCF 
budgetBars/boxes in the diagram are 
not to sized scale of budgets This target option has been included as an alternative example of a 
target based on science. The Tyndall Centre method has been 
developed specifically for Local Authorities in terms of area -wide 
emissions.
Context
The schematic on the left shows the approach taken by the Tyndall 
Centre to scaling emissions to derive a carbon budget. The global 
budget represents the total emissions allowed before the well below 
2°C threshold for greenhouse gas concentration is crossed. This global 
budget can then be scaled down to a national level, and finally, a 
regional level.
Criteria
•This budget represents CO2only -Although other greenhouse gases do 
impact climate change, carbon dioxide is the main driver of long -
term warming.
•Energy only budget -It excludes aviation from the budget, instead 
this is allocated at a national level. Land use and Land Use Change 
and Forestry (LULUCF) is also recommended to be monitored 
separately. 
•Scope 3 in terms of the district is not included -i.e. activities outside 
of the district boundary. Note that scope 3 in terms of the district is 
not the same as scope 3 for the organisation. In fact, some scope 3 
activities of the council would fall into scope 1 of the district.Scaled 
to HDCThe carbon budget for Horsham as a 
district is available here:
•An energy system budget between 
2020-2100 of 4.5 million tCO2.
•A consistent annual emissions 
reduction rate of 13.5% is needed 
to adhere to this budget.Extra step 
added for 
this project
Horsham District Council | Setting a Target4703 –SETTING A TARGET
TYNDALL BUDGET -ANALYSIS
 - 500 1,000 1,500 2,000 2,500 3,000 3,500
2018
2020
2022
2024
2026
2028
2030
2032
2034
2036
2038
2040
2042
2044
2046
2048
2050Tyndall centre
Tyndall Budget 2025 Total 
tCO2e2030 Total 
tCO2e2050 Total 
tCO2eTotal carbon 
budget at 
2050
Combined S1&2 1,213 587 32
24,593Total % reduction 
from 201864% 82% 99%Method
The method taken by the Tyndall Centre is outlined on the previous page. 
However, the budget is available for Horsham as a district therefore this has been 
scaled down to Horsham Council at an organisational level to provide a target. 
There is no defined method for scaling this to organisations. How the budget is 
split amongst organisations and groups in the district is not prescribed. 
In this instance, the grandfathering approach has been extended based on the 
Council’s 2018 footprint. The grandfathering method is based on historic 
contributions i.e. the average proportion of CO2emissions from a particular 
group in recent years.
As this approach is budget based, the figure to the right is an example of how 
this budget could be allocated. If Horsham Council were to continue emitting 
Scope 1 and 2 emissions at the same rate as in 2018/19 then the budget would 
run out in 7 years.
How does this relate to the Paris Agreement?
As shown on the previous page, a global carbon budget is taken in from the IPPC 
Special Report on 1.5 °C. A key difference between this approach and SBTiis the 
way the budget is allocated. The Tyndall budget approach is focused on equity 
and responsibility of regions, with a smaller budget allocated to OECD countries. 
There are also differences in what emissions are excluded from the budget, the 
full method is available here.
Horsham District Council | Setting a Target48Advantages
•Based on robust scientific methodology specific to Local Authorities
•Alignment with international climate targets
•Horsham making fair contribution to emissions reduction 
•A budgets approach is an effective way to understand total emissions reductions required
•Takes a leading by example approach for the district
Disadvantages
•Not aimed at an organisational level, more appropriate to use at a district level
•Requires immediate ambitious actions, large reductions are required in the short term
•More complex to understand
Relationship to district 
•This type of target is aimed at the district so there is a potential to align a district and 
organisational target. 
This approach to target setting is based on the principles and targets of the Paris Agreement 
–Horsham making its fair contribution to limiting global warming to well below 2 °C towards
1.5°C. However, this approach is designed for the district as a whole so Horsham should 
consider the way this budget should be allocated amongst stakeholders in the district. 03 –SETTING A TARGET
TYNDALL BUDGET -SUMMARY
Horsham District Council | Setting a Target
4903 –SETTING A 
TARGET
E) COMPARING 
CARBON 
REDUCTION 
PATHWAYSHaving reviewed each target option available to Horsham District Council, we now provide 
a direct comparison of each option. Considering this in the context of the Business as Usual 
pathway highlights the scale of ambition required. 
Horsham District Council | Setting a Target5003 –SETTING A TARGET
COMPARING CARBON REDUCTION PATHWAYS -COMPARISON
 - 500 1,000 1,500 2,000 2,500 3,000 3,500tCO2e
2030 Carbon Neutral Target –100% reduction 
in emissions by 20302050 Carbon Neutral Target –100% reduction 
in emissions
Aligning with a 1.5 °C Target –100% 
reduction in emissions by 2042Aligning with a 2 °C Target –80% reduction in 
emissions by 2050
Tyndall Budget –99% reduction in emissions 
by 2050.BAU –Business as usual, where reductions 
come from decarbonisation of the grid
Horsham District Council | Setting a Target51Target Scope Criteria Key Milestones Yearly reduction Carbon Budget 
2018 -2050 (tCO2e)Assumptions
2030 Carbon 
NeutralOptional None 100% reduction by 
20308.3% reduction 
from 2018/19 level21,762 Assumes linear 
reduction to fixed 
date
2050 Carbon 
NeutralOptional None 100% reduction by 
20503.1% reduction 
from 2018/19 level55,242 Assumes linear 
reduction to fixed 
date
Science -based 
target (2 °C)Scope 1 and 2. Scope 
3 if criteria met.No offsetting
Scope 3 target if Scope 3 
emissions over 40%
Minimum 5 years and a 
maximum of 15 years
Covers all GHGs80% reduction by 
20502.6% reduction 
from 2018/19 level66,290 Assumes IPCC "well 
below 2 °C" 
trajectory is 
followed linearly
Science -based 
target (1.5 °C)Scope 1 and 2. Scope 
3 if criteria met.No offsetting
Scope 3 target if Scope 3 
emissions over 40%
Minimum 5 years and a 
maximum of 15 years
Covers all GHGs100% reduction by 
20424.2% reduction 
from 2018/19 level41,542 Assumes IPCC "1.5 
°C" trajectory is 
followed linearly
Tyndall Carbon 
BudgetAll emissions within 
boundaryShort term ambitious 
action required99% reduction in 
emissions by 
2050. Reaches 
near zero at 204113.5% reduction 
from previous year24,593 Grandfathering from 
Horsham local 
authority area based 
on emissions share.03 –SETTING A TARGET
COMPARING CARBON REDUCTION PATHWAYS -KEY STATISTICS
Horsham District Council | Setting a Target5203 –SETTING A TARGET
COMPARING CARBON REDUCTION PATHWAYS -SUMMARY
2050 Net Zero
Linear reductions to 2050
55,242 tCO2100% reduction by 
2050
Aligned with 
national targets
Other authorities 
choosing to be 
more ambitious
2030 Net Zero
Linear reductions to 2030
21,762 tCO2100% reduction by 
2030
Aligned with 
county targets
Not based on 
scientific pathway
Well below 2 °C
Science -based target
66,290 tCO280% reduction by 
2050
Based on science 
and Paris 
Agreement
Aimed at private 
sector
1.5°C
Science -based target
41,542 tCO2100% reduction by 
2042
Based on science 
and Paris 
Agreement
Aimed at private 
sector
Tyndall Budget
Paris-aligned carbon budget
24,593 tCO2Near zero at 2041
Horsham’s ‘fair’ 
contribution
Aimed at district 
level
Most Ambitious Least Ambitious 
2050 cumulative emissions 2050 cumulative emissions 2050 cumulative emissions 2050 cumulative emissions 2050 cumulative emissions
Horsham District Council | Setting a Target5303 –SETTING A 
TARGET
F) SCOPE 1 & 2 
RECOMMENDATIONWe have considered the differing Scope 1 & 2 target options available to you, reviewing varying 
ambition levels in line with the local context at Horsham District Council, and our broader 
experiences, to provide a recommendation. 
Horsham District Council | Setting a Target5403 –SETTING A TARGET
SCOPE 1 & 2 TARGET RECOMMENDATION
Anthesis recommends Horsham District Council apply the Carbon Neutral by 2030 target in addressing their Scope 1 and 2 emissions. By setting this ambitious 
target you will enter a position of leadership and be acting in line with West Sussex County Council’s ambitions.
Unlike the Science Based Target method, setting an Absolute Reduction pathway keeps offsetting options open to you -we will expl ore wider district 
sequestration opportunities in further detail later in this report. You will also have greater freedom to approach your repor ting in a way which suits your 
organisation. 
As your Scope 3 emissions lie outside of your direct control, we recommend a separate target -we will explore this next. 
Why Lead? 
•Signal Strong Leadership -In the spirit of driving ambitious action in the wider district, choosing this target signals strong intention to act
•Maximise direct financial benefit –Through energy efficiency and renewables, along with avoiding increased costs due to increasing energy prices, 
future carbon taxes or other legislative measures. Setting an ambitious target locks in these benefits early, meaning they pa yback for longer. 
•Maximise reputational benefit –Attempting something truly transformational and more ambitious may create a strong point of differentiation, 
establishing the district as a leader. 
•Future proof against change -Targets are only likely to become more ambitious. Consistent performance gaps (at a global, macro -economic scale) 
combined with constantly evolving evidence, continues to push the probabilities of adverse impacts in the wrong direction. 
•Take comfort in the contingency –Unlike other targets, if you were to fall short, ending up ‘in the pack’ is still not a bad thing. However, aiming to be 
‘in the pack’ and falling short, may be a different matter. Additionally, a lesser scale of ambition may inadvertently constr aininnovation and the 
appetite to transform, before you’ve even got started. 
•Carry out your moral duty –In 10 years time, younger generations may be asking why local authorities and individuals didn’t do more when they had 
the chance. 
Horsham District Council | Setting a Target5503 –SETTING A 
TARGET
G) SCOPE 3 While outside of your direct control, addressing your organisation’s Scope 3 emissions presents an 
opportunity to catalyse the broader adoption of carbon reduction initiatives in the district. 
Anthesis understands that Horsham District Council wishes to set an example here, actively 
driving emissions reductions among its suppliers and in the wider community. 
Horsham District Council | Setting a Target5603 –SETTING A TARGET
ADDRESSING SCOPE 3
Your Scope 3 emissions comprise a significant proportion of your emissions. We recommend addressing your Scope 3 emissions in a separate target to your 
Scope 1 & 2. Since all Scope 3 emissions lie outside of your direct control, we advise focussing your target on two selected emissions subgroups, associated 
with your Contracts , and Leased Buildings.
In coming this judgement, we have considered: 
•Your level of influence within Scope 3 -we consider your contracts and leased buildings to 
be within your stronger influence
•Addressing a significant proportion of your Scope 3 emissions -To be meaningful, your 
Scope 3 target needs to cover a significant proportion of your Scope 3 emissions. We 
recommend following the SBTi guidance for Scope 3 targets: where Scope 3 emissions exceed 
40% of your total emissions, the target must address over 2/3 of your emissions. Your Scope 3 
emissions comprise 81% of your total emissions. 
•Resource Efficiency -How to provide an efficient way for you to address a large volume of 
emissions (administrative capacity, cost), while also stimulating low carbon development in 
the district. We believe this applies strongly to emissions associated with your contracts. 
•Building synergies within sectors and between targets, to maximise impact. (For example, 
your retrofit policies for your operated buildings could also be applied to owned and leased 
buildings)
Horsham District Council | Setting a Target0%
83%1%0%2%1%
11%0%
0%2%
Business Travel (1%) Contracts (83%)
Electricity T&D (1%) Fleet T&D (<1%)
Fleet WTT (2%) Gas Upstream (1%)
Leased Buildings (11%) Waste (<1%)
Water (<1%) Commuting (2%)<1% <1%<1%
<1%
15,003
tCO2eScope 3 emissions breakdown by source5703 –SETTING A TARGET 
SCOPE 3 -TARGET RECOMMENDATION
We recommend Horsham District Council set a Carbon Neutral by 2050 target for your Scope 3 emissions associated with Procurement and Leased 
Buildings . 
Why set this target?
•Considering the level of ambition -the inherent challenges in reducing your Scope 3 emissions which mean that a differing level of ambition to your 
Scope 1 and 2 is suitable. 
•Setting a defined boundary –choosing which Scope 3 emissions you wish to address helps you to focus on those emissions you are most able to 
influence. By choosing to follow the SBTi guidance to cover a “significant” portion of your emissions, you are surpassing the minimum threshold for 
action. 
•Influencing your suppliers -In setting a Scope 3 target, SBTi guidance recommends supplier engagement as a key route to achieving emissions 
reductions -by addressing all emissions associated with your contracts, you are ideally positioned to do this. 
•Considering offsets -Similar to your Scope 1 & 2 target, in setting an absolute linear reduction target, offsets can be explored
•Wider ambitions -This target mirrors the UK’s target to become Net Zero by 2050, which will have far reaching cross -sectoral impacts on the low 
carbon transition. Working in parallel with this target positions you to benefit from the wider systemic changes stimulated, particularly as these 
emissions primarily lie in the district, outside your direct control. 
Horsham District Council | Setting a Target5803 –SETTING A TARGET 
SCOPE 3 –FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS
Other actions available to you around Scope 3
•Advocate for improved Scope 3 data. Our review of your Scope 3 footprint revealed some data quality issues. Resolving these w illimprove 
confidence and position you to target emissions hotspots as part of any future strategy development.
•Explore setting a district wide carbon target. This will enable you to much more directly address your Scope 3 emissions and makes it easier to 
engage local stakeholders who are currently harder to reach.
Justifying this level of ambition
Setting this wide ranging Scope 3 target can seem daunting and will require buy -in across the organisation. In securing this, we suggest highlighting: 
•Global Carbon budgets -Your Scope 3 (or “consumption based”) emissions, as a proportion of your total emissions, are much bigger than the 
districts' own, highlighting the need to address these in the spirit of the global carbon budgets.
•Benefits in the wider district -Since many sources of Scope 3 emissions occur in the district, the area will stand to benefit directly through your 
efforts, both in terms of carbon savings, and wider co -benefits (e.g. cleaner air, warmer housing).
•Financial benefits -When addressing the impacts of your suppliers and contracts, financial benefits can be generated through emissions 
reductions. These are likely to be passed on to your own organisation. 
•Scope 3 emissions are moving up the agenda -Consumption based emissions are receiving increased scrutiny more generally, with reports from 
the likes of the UK Green Building Council , and C40 Cities advocating for improved emissions reporting methodologies. Improved Scope 3 
reporting increases its credibility in decision making, facilitating carbon reduction actions. 
Horsham District Council | Setting a Target5903 –SETTING A 
TARGET
H) NEXT STEPSAs next steps, Anthesis recommends: 
•Formally approve your Carbon Targets for Scope 1&2, and Scope 3, and publicly declare 
your commitments through press releases, social media, and website updates. 
•Review your climate action plan and begin to chart a course to achieve your target. 
Ensure your carbon target is embedded in your governance structures. Policies, 
incentives, processes and controls should align with the target. 
•Establish internal data management protocols to ensure your progress against the 
target is rigorously tracked on an annual basis. This should include:
•An annual carbon footprinting exercise. This can follow a consistent method to 
allow comparability and keep costs down. 
•Using the indicators provided in the Action Plan, review progress against your 
carbon reduction initiative
•Undertake a comprehensive review of your Scope 3 emissions to increase confidence.
•Use the internal buy -in and learnings gained through this report and your organisational 
target to begin a dialogue around a district -wide climate target. In turn, setting a 
district wide target will empower you to better influence your scope 3 emissions. 
Setting a district wide target encourages innovative solutions and shares the 
responsibility, stimulating action on the ground. 04Action Planning
61Urgent emissions reductions activities are required to be undertaken by HDC for them 
to achieve the target recommended in Section 3 of this report. This Carbon Reduction 
Action Plan is focused on actions that HDC should consider deploying directly in 
support of their chosen climate target. Please note that costs and savings are based 
on proxies and should only be used to provide an idea of magnitude. 
The appendices provide further detail on the methodology behind our calculations of 
carbon impacts and costs, and the associated assumptions. 04 –ACTION 
PLANNING 
A) INTRODUCTIONBuilding the case for action
Horsham District councillors have acknowledged in a notice of motion that they are committed to developing a plan 
of practical changes they can implement to work towards a zero -carbon target. This action plan has been developed 
to meet that commitment. In Chapter 3, we recommended that the council can now take their commitments 
further by publicly pledging a climate target. In doing so, the council will be acknowledging the challenge ahead, 
and making a statement of intent to drive the aggressive systemic changes required. This will provide further 
impetus for uptake of the action plan. 
The actions available to you vary substantially in terms of cost, impact, and ease of implementation. To help you 
prioritise where to act first, we have provided further commentary on 1) How we prioritised which actions to 
include (see Appendix), and 2) How HDC should prioritise the actions moving forward. 
Considering Co -benefits
It is widely accepted that decarbonising will offer many co -benefits. These include:
•Health improvements –Due to cleaner air, warmer homes, more exercise and better mental health.
•Economic improvements –Less lost time due to traffic congestion, job creation in the low -carbon sector, 
operational cost savings via increased energy efficiency and waste reduction 
•Biodiversity improvements –Investments in green infrastructure and nature based solutions to climate change 
(i.e. tree planting, peatland management, etc.) can have a wide range of additional benefits including supporting 
biodiversity, water, soil and air quality. 
However, recent science indicates that decarbonisation needs to accelerate, and as a result, not only are we 
forgoing opportunities to live better, healthier lives, we are exposing ourselves more severe climate change 
impacts. In the action plan, we have included commentary on anticipated co -benefits associated with each 
opportunity, to help you further build out the case for action. 
62 Horsham District Council | Action Planning04 –ACTION PLANNING
INTRODUCTION 
Review of HDC Emissions Profile
•Review of emissions hotspots to identify 
priority areas for action.
•Determination of scope and boundary of 
target and associated actions.
63 Horsham District Council | Action Planning04 –ACTION PLANNING
ACTION PLANNING PROCESS
Further Research into proposed actions
•Consideration of stakeholder comments to 
develop ideas further, prioritise, and finalise 
action plan content.
•Assessment of the potential of proposed 
actions in terms of cost, benefits and 
implementation.Initial Stakeholder Engagement 
Calls with HDC sector leads to: 
•Develop understanding of HDC’s assets 
and organisational structures, informing 
our view of council influence.
•Discuss any pre -existing carbon reduction 
initiatives.
•Resolve any outstanding data related 
queries.Stakeholder Engagement Workshop
•Provide stakeholders with an 
opportunity to inform, critique and 
prioritise content for the Action 
Plan. 
•Identify factors that may enable or 
challenge various council emissions 
reductions activities.
04 –ACTION PLANNING
PRIORITISATION YOUR ACTIONS
64 Horsham District Council | Action PlanningReducing 
energy 
Demand
Switching to 
low carbon 
energy 
systems
Decarbonising 
energy supply
OffsettingReducing demand should always come first. This avoids placing too much reliance on long -
term, higher risk renewable supply infrastructure to deliver the emissions savings so urgently 
required, safeguarding carbon budgets in the process. Example interventions: Building 
retrofit; Driving less/modal shifts; Behaviour change.
Low carbon energy systems represent the next step in terms of value for money, while also offering a 
number of co -benefits. Example interventions: Phasing out diesel vehicles; Electrifying processes; 
Green standards in buildings.
Decarbonising energy supply
Higher risk infrastructure projects tend to be more expensive and require more political will to 
get off the ground. As high profile initiatives visible to many, they can as a signal of intent and 
inspire action outside your direct control. Example interventions: Installing PV; Improving 
storage capacity; Renewable energy supply.
Offsetting
Residual emissions can be tackled through a transparent, well -defined strategy of carbon 
offsetting. Despite its criticisms and limitations, offsetting is an important and valid 
mechanism that can help meet carbon neutrality goals. Example interventions: Natural 
sequestration projects; Out -of-boundary investments (i.e. carbon credits).Being able to confidently prioritise actions is important for HDC as it begins to coordinate actions and projects. It can be helpful to refer to a defined hierarchy of 
actions when considering new initiatives.
This hierarchy is of course idealised and naturally the council’s influence and key stakeholders may allow or encourage some actions to be implemented before others. 
Further details of prioritisation as it applies to the actions in the plan can be found in the appendix. Wider Context and Delivery
Additional commentary around best practice, co -benefits, key 
legislation, and monitoring indicators.  
65 Horsham District Council | Action Planning04 –ACTION PLANNING
NAVIGATING THE ACTION PLAN
We have presented the opportunities in this Action Plan by sector, in line with the process outlined in our commentary on pri oritisation. Actions are grouped 
into various Sectors and then sub -sectors, referred to as Action Planning Groups as shown below (left). Each planning group is s tructured consistently as 
shown below (right).  
Sector
Action Planning Groups
Transportation 
& Fleet•Demand Reduction
•Alternative Fuels
Property •Behaviour change
•New properties
•Retrofit/ Energy Efficient Tech
•Green Energy
Procurement •Sustainable Procurement
Parks & 
Countryside•Mapping Sequestration 
Opportunities
•Protecting and Enhancing StockIntroduction to the Sector
Overview of the HDC activities covered by this sector, key emissions 
hotspots, and key themes from stakeholder engagements.
Enabling Actions (if appliable)
Overview of any enabling actions required before implementation of the 
Carbon Reduction Action/s. These do not lead to a direct carbon saving. 
For example, it is essential to develop your supplier data reporting 
processes so you can fully evaluate their performance, before installing 
a Sustainable Procurement Policy. 
Carbon Reduction Actions
Overview of recommended carbon reduction activities, including 
estimated impact and cost. For example, by implementing a Sustainable 
Procurement Policy and engaging your contractors accordingly, you will 
be creating a measurable carbon reduction in your value chain. Detail provided 
per 
Action Planning 
GroupOverview of action groupings per sector66 Horsham District Council | Action Planning04 –ACTION PLANNING
NAVIGATING THE ACTION PLAN
Glossary of terms
•Description -This provides an introduction to the overall goal the council 
will need to achieve. For Enabling Actions, we have clarified how this action 
enables further Carbon Reduction activities. 
•Estimated Cost -Indicative potential capital and/or operational costs of 
each measure have been provided where possible. Due to limitations of 
budget and scope, this is not comprehensive cost analysis but provides an 
indication of relevant financial costs based on publicly available data. As 
such, we advise:
•Associated assumptions are reviewed and fully understood by the 
Council
•No reliance by the council (or any other party) should be placed on 
these figures due to the inherent limitations in assumptions –these 
are simply intended to help inform relative priority of actions and 
how more robust estimates could be performed.
•Stakeholders -Stakeholders identified within HDC who are best placed to 
manage the implementation of the action.
•Carbon Saving -An estimation of the magnitude of carbon savings that could 
be achieved by the action is included. Note this is an indication that should 
only be used to provide an idea of the scale of savings. It does not directly 
correspond to the achievement of the overall target. Potential co -benefits 
of the measures are also listed. Similar to Estimated Costs:
•Associated assumptions are reviewed and fully understood by the 
Council•No reliance by the council (or any other party) should be placed on 
these figures due to the inherent limitations in assumptions –these 
are simply intended to help inform relative priority of actions and 
how more robust estimates could be performed. 
•Implementation -Here we provide detail on the steps to be taken in 
implementing the action, including any additional context in relation to HDC 
specifically. This includes specifying any relevant HDC processes or strategic 
priorities, clarifying (where necessary) which part of HDC’s assets or 
footprint profile the action relates to, and any key barriers or opportunities 
raised in the stakeholder consultation session. We also provide a suggested 
timeframe for the implementation of the action. 
•Examples of Best Practice -Case studies of similar actions. 
•Co-Benefits -These are defined as the positive effects that a policy or 
measure aimed at one objective (i.e. Action Planning Opportunities) might 
have on other objectives. Considering co -benefits is useful in helping 
stakeholders build the case for action.
•Monitoring Indicators -Monitoring your progress around the action planning 
opportunities is important to track uptake and ensure continued 
performance. Here we provide example indicators which HDC may choose to 
apply.  
•Key Legislation -Here we provide an overview of any key legislative drivers 
which could effect implementation of the action.6704 –ACTION 
PLANNING 
B) COSTSIt is important to understand how costs should be considered when it comes to 
climate action. Not only the different types of costs that may apply to different 
measures, but also who will actually incur the cost and any associated benefits –in 
many cases there are options and impacts outside of the council. “
68 Horsham District Council |Action PlanningThe difference in cost between 
targets is less about absolute 
cost and scale of investment, 
and more about timing and 
when the investment is made69 Horsham District Council |Action Planning04 –ACTION PLANNING
COSTS –WHO PAYS AND BENEFITS
Cost considerations are a natural priority when making a climate commitment. Targets with the same end point in theory requir e the same level of 
investment. This implies that the difference between targets is less about absolute cost and scale capital investment, and mo re about the timing and when 
the investment is made. However, there are a few other cost impacts that in reality, may apply: 
However, there may also be additional costs:
These may be linked to subsequent economies of scale being generated 
as demand for low carbon technology and services increases. 
For example:
•Manufacturing costs mayfall as production of low carbon technology 
is scaled up
•Supply of skilled labour maybecome more accessible and greater 
over time
•Marginal technology efficiency improvements maycontinue over 
time too (but no ‘silver bullet’ or transformational change in low 
carbon technology is anticipated in the next 5 -10 years)There are benefits in moving sooner:
There may also be associated ‘costs of inaction’ in delaying action. 
For example:
•Health and economic impacts and co -benefits can be realised earlier
•Costs of retrofitting are more expensive than building properties 
lower -carbon first time. The Committee on Climate Change
estimates this could be 5 -times more.
•Lower operational costs of buildings will pay -back sooner, especially 
if energy prices increase.
•You are less likely to incur costs associated with climate change and 
more frequent extreme weather events, if you play your full part to 
keep within the recommended carbon budget.
•Your role as a leader may inspire other organisations and help to 
stimulate the market, allowing future economies of scale to be 
realised by others, along with the other benefits above. 
Higher Certainty Lower70 Horsham District Council |Action PlanningWhat do we mean by ‘cost’?
Throughout the plan, our ‘by proxy’ approach to cost has meant that we have included financial metrics, however, these are ba sedon secondary research and 
were often included based on availability. It is important to note that a number of types of financial metrics that we have p resented, that can mean very 
different things: 
Who actually incurs the cost?
We are seeing an emergence of alternative forms of finance that can help accelerate carbon savings, but reduce the burden on needing to make significant 
capital outlays. For example, we are seeing many technology providers offer to provide the capital investment (at no cost to thecouncil / tenant), in return 
for a share of the operational return. In this scenario, the council may not need to make any outlay (other than perhaps lega l fees or time relating to 
contractual matters).
An example of technology provider and a district network operator (DNO) supporting low carbon capital investment at no cost t o the tenant can be found 
here. Energy Service Companies or ‘ ESCo’s commonly able to offer this service if access to finance is limited. Capital costsOperational / 
‘Revenue’ costsResource / time costs
For example, the cost of a EV, that 
is then recognised on a balance 
sheet and depreciated over its 
useful economic lifeFor example, monthly energy bills 
or asset maintenance that reduce 
the council’s annual surplus 
(profit)Typically a type of operational 
cost, but expressed in units of 
time or full time employees, as a 
reallocation of an existing role 
may be possibleSavings / payback
Many low carbon costs result in 
direct and indirect benefits, many 
of which are financial. It is 
important that any savings or 
payback periods are considered. 
This will give critical balance to 
the investment appraisal process04 –ACTION PLANNING
COSTS -DEFINITIONS71 Horsham District Council |Action PlanningAre financial paybacks 
and up -sides incorporated 
into investment 
appraisals? 
Commonly these are not 
appropriately measured or 
captured. This is often due 
to the co -benefits being 
realised in different 
budgets (e.g. operational 
budget holders not talking 
to capital budget holders) 
or departments (energy 
teams not talking to the 
asset managers).
At a district scale, it can 
often be difficult to 
attribute health savings to 
property or clean air 
investment; but as 
demonstrated with 
extracts opposite, these 
benefits do exist. 
An example of socio & economic upsides of low carbon 
investment in buildings, as estimated by the UKGBC .
Example of the socio & economic impacts of unsustainable 
transport, which served as a motivator for increasing 
cycling networks in Greater Manchester. 04 –ACTION PLANNING
COSTS –WHO PAYS AND BENEFITS72 Horsham District Council |Action Planning04 –ACTION PLANNING
COSTS –COSTS OF ACTION VS COSTS OF OFFSETTING
HDC may seek to calculate a carbon saving per pound spent (£/tCO2) to offer a basis for prioritising measures against each other. Comparisons may 
also be made against purchasing of carbon offsets. HDC must ensure any comparison against offsetting is fair and on 'like -for-like' terms. More 
broadly, we would caution against offsetting for the reasons outlined below:
Offsetting challenges
•Diverse range of price and quality: There is a big 
range in offset prices and quality offsetting options, 
making it difficult to find a single point of comparison
•Prices of UK based offsets are increasing: Demand 
for offsetting is increasing, pushing up the price of UK 
based certified offsets up
•Annual cost without ROI: Offsets are required to be 
purchased every year, and typically offer no return on 
investment (if out of the district boundary)
•Negative public perceptions: Offsets should typically 
be applied by councils as a “last resort” or temporary 
measure, where there is a lack of alternative 
technologies, or speed of implementation is a factor. 
•Diversion of co -benefits: Many existing certified 
schemes may divert public money and co -benefits of 
actions outside of the district Direct action comparison challenges
•Cost ‘category’ needs to be compared like for like: As illustrated earlier in this section , costs are categorised as 
capital, revenue, and/or other resources & time. Comparing a revenue cost of offsetting against just a capital cost 
of an investment in buildings won’t tell the full story.  
•Include savings & co -benefits: Many direct actions and projects also offer direct and indirect financial savings 
which need to be included. Over time, this will reduce the lifetime cost of the investment and may pay -back. 
Offsets do not currently offer any form of direct payback. 
•Timeframe needs to be compared like for like: Comparing capital costs against 1 year of offsets would be 
misleading –the cumulative total of the offset would need to be equal to the lifetime of the capital asset. For 
example, if a building has a 50 year lifespan, the capital cost less revenue cost savings (on energy bills) would 
need to be compared to 50 x the annual offset cost. 
•Additionality of cost needs isolating: Some investments may have needed to happen anyway; for example you 
may be required to make capital expenditure on assets that are coming to the end of their life. S o considering 
how to decouple additional ‘low carbon’ spend from planned maintenance is important. For example, if a gas 
boiler needs replacing, it is important to look at the additional cost of a low -carbon heat pump relative to a gas 
boiler, rather than the cost of a heat -pump in isolation. 
•Consider other co -benefits: The nuances of co -benefits and indirect savings of climate action are hard to 
quantify and could go unrepresented in a cost comparison, with the district standing to miss these if offsetting is 
prioritised. Often, health and productivity benefits go un -measured. 04 –ACTION PLANNING
COST –COMMON FUNDING MECHANISMS
73Type Description Examples
National Level FundingThere are a variety of national initiatives that could be utilised to 
provide funding for climate change projects including: ECO funding, 
Sustainable Transport Fund, Salix Finance. Southampton City Council -worked with Salix Finance (interest free 
government funding) to deliver energy efficiency projects in eight of 
their schools. 
European FundingThere are several EU grants available to support local climate change 
projects including: LIFE Climate Action, European regional 
development fund (ERDF), European social fund (ESF). Homes as Energy Systems (HAES) –ERDF and Retrofit Works Project, 
Greater Manchester, includes 3 projects in Stockport.
Section 106 A financial contribution used to mitigate the impact of new 
developments on infrastructure and communities. Waltham Forest –using Section 106 funding from new developments to 
improve walking and cycling infrastructure 
Community Infrastructure LevyA charge which can be levied by local authorities on new 
development in their area to deliver infrastructure. (Tariff -based)City of London -allocated to broad infrastructure spending priorities: 
public realm and local transport improvements (40%); social and 
community enhancements (10%); and open spaces (5%). 
Workplace Car Parking Levy.This could be an annual fee paid by businesses with 10+ parking 
spaces.
The fund can be used to improve local infrastructure. Nottingham City Council -introduced a parking levy which has been 
used to fund extensions to the existing tram system. 
Crowdfunding and Municipal 
Community BondsSee Financing for Society: Local Authority Guide for information 
about crowdfunding as a potential model of finance for the public 
sector.Swindon Borough Council -used a crowdfunding platform to raise a total 
of £4.3m to operate a solar park.
Local Taxation Explore opportunities to leverage local taxation. Various Councils nationally are considering how Business Rates could 
better stimulate lower carbon action and investment. No published info 
at present. 
Revenue Generation ProjectsPotential to generate finance from renewable energy or congestion 
charge. Telford & Wrekin Council 4MW ground mounted solar farm, on 
agricultural land owned by the council. Generates a profit of 
approximately £150k/year with a project lifetime of 25 years.Potential funding mechanisms to support carbon reduction. This list is by no means exhaustive and other mechanisms may also b e available. 04 –ACTION 
PLANNING
C) TRANSPORTATION 
& FLEET
Emission 
Source2018/2019 
tCO2e
Scope 1
Fleet 1,248
Scope 2
EV Fleet 2
Scope 3
Fleet (WTT) 295
EV Fleet (T&D) <1
Business Travel 70
Commuting 316
Total 1,931
11%of total footprint 
of Scope 1 emissions
63
%Fleet
8%
Business 
Travel
0%Commuing
2%The emissions from transport and fleet were estimated as 1,913 tCO2e. Fleet makes up 63% of Scope 
1 emissions, with the majority of this produced by the council’s refuse fleet vehicles (89%). 
Transport also comes into Scope 3 emissions when accounting for transportation of fuel (WTT) and 
staff travel in terms of business travel and commuting. Although, staff travel is not within direct 
control of the council, the behaviour of staff is within its influence and cost -effective. Upstream WTT 
is classed as weaker control as it is difficult for the council to reduce this alone. 
There were several opportunities discussed for this sector given that a number of interventions in this 
sector have already been implemented during COVID -19.
<1%Scope 1 and 2 emissions breakdown by vehicle type
5%0% 0%
89%6%
Cars (5%)
Electric cars (<1%)
Grounds maintenance vehicles (<1%)
Refuse truck (89%)
Vans & HGVs (6%)<1%<1%Transport emissions breakdown 
by scope
No. tCO2
11 79
3 2
2 2
291370
18 94Total 2018/19 footprint with emissions 
from Transport and Fleet highlighted.75 Horsham District Council |Action Planning04 –ACTION PLANNING
TRANSPORTATION & FLEET –ACTION PLAN -CARBON REDUCTION
Priority 1: Demand reduction
Reduce car journeys by employees by reducing the distance travelled/fuel consumption and encouraging alternative modes of tra nsport.
Actions Description Estimated 
CostCarbon saving Stakeholders Implementation
Route 
Optimisation 
for Refuse 
Collection 
Vehicles 
(RCVs)Explore route 
optimisation software and 
monitoring for reducing 
mileage of refuse 
collection vehicles and 
the number of vehicles Dependent on 
chosen 
software/
technology -
offset by fuel 
savings95 tCO 2e Transport 
manager, 
working in 
conjunction with 
WasteGiven the time constraints and costs involved in replacing LGVs 
entirely, this could form a key action to reduce emissions in the short 
term at relatively lower cost. Improvements in route efficiency could 
also ultimately reduce the requirement for RCV's altogether. Anthesis 
understands HDC has already undertaken a limited trial of route 
optimisation, with some of the fleet, but this is not yet extended to 
RCV's. 
•Review current route maps and vehicle numbers
•Assess technology providers available and best practice form other 
Local Authorities. 
•Assess whether any vehicles can be decommissioned.
Timeframe: <1 year 
Eco-training 
for driversEquip any drivers of 
council vehicles with the 
necessary knowledge to 
more appropriately plan 
journeys to help make 
driving more efficient and 
reduce fuel consumptionThe Energy 
Saving Trust 
currently 
offer 
subsidised 
driver training 
programmes.
Approximately 
£2,00053 tCO 2e Transport 
manager, likely 
in coordination 
with HR Our stakeholder consultation showed low awareness of the benefits of 
this programme within HDC, so a staff engagement programme could 
be required before launch.
•Introduce a fleet management system and telematics to monitor 
fleet usage and mileage.
•Establish who should benefit from driver training and organise 
training sessions.
Timeframe: 1 year 76 Horsham District Council |Action Planning04 –ACTION PLANNING
TRANSPORTATION & FLEET –ACTION PLAN -CARBON REDUCTION
Priority 1: Demand reduction
Actions Description Estimated Cost Carbon saving Stakeholders Implementation
Working from 
Home assessmentConduct travel survey of staff 
to calculate footprint to 
inform working from home 
policies. It is necessary to 
assess this given that the 
carbon savings achieved 
through reducing travel may 
not be balanced by the 
additional energy required to 
heat homes. Additional staff 
resource for 2 -3 
month project126 tCO 2e(not 
including 
additional costs 
for home heating)HR Department In exploring this opportunity, consideration of the impact of the 
ongoing COVID -19 pandemic is recommended: stakeholders have 
advised that Working from Home habits have changed 
substantially since lockdown, and this could be the primary driver 
of behaviour change. Nevertheless, a staff assessment will help to 
better understand the carbon impact of any such behaviour 
change. In the longer term, should HDC wish to act on any change 
to working patters, it is expected that the property team lead the 
ongoing conversation around the suitability of the main office as a 
working space.
•Assessment of staff travel -this requires some understanding of 
the distances and mode of transport used for commuting. 
•This must consider the impact on emissions for the district as 
emissions may be passed from the council to individuals and 
actually increase emissions in the district if homes are 
inefficient. (See Box 1)
•Assess the suitability of each department for staff to increase 
home working. 
Timeframe: 1 year 77 Horsham District Council |Action Planning04 –ACTION PLANNING
TRANSPORTATION & FLEET –ACTION PLAN -CARBON REDUCTION
Priority 1: Demand reduction
Actions Description Estimated Cost Carbon saving Stakeholders Implementation
Greener 
commuting Encourage active travel or 
public transport for 
commuting through offering 
incentives and providing 
facilities to support thisNo cost to council 
unless they invest 
in further 
schemes/facilities
E.g. Cycle Parking: 
Bike stands: £30 -
£40
Covered parking: 
£1,800 plus stands
Lockers: £620+ per 
lockerIncreasing those 
who walk and 
cycle to 25% saves 
21 tCO 2e HR Department This may be difficult to assess currently. There are already some 
schemes in existence to encourage lower carbon commuting. 
•If conducting a travel survey for staff include questions of what 
would encourage staff to use active travel. 
•Explore the possibility of providing incentives such as financial 
rewards to free breakfasts for greener commuting. 
•Review the facilities and schemes available to staff to 
encourage green commuting.
•Explore potential to join West Sussex car sharing scheme post -
COVID -19 and become a member of an easit network or similar.
Timeframe: 2 years
Reducing overall 
business travel 
and encouraging 
active travel 
modes for 
necessary 
business travelEncourage active travel or 
public transport for business 
travel through offering 
incentives and providing 
facilities to support thisAs above 15 tCO 2e HR Department Opportunity to build on current practices from COVID -19 of virtual 
meetings. Important to prevent a return to car use by encouraging 
active transport.
•Similar to commuting, review the current modes of travel and 
barriers facing low carbon business travel.
•Consider ways to incentivise this.
•Improve monitoring of business travel mileage.
Timeframe: 2 years78 Horsham District Council |Action PlanningExamples of Best Practice 
Oxford City Council All registered drivers at the council were required to complete the EST 
smarter driving course. This achieved a 17% reduction in fuel use in the first year. This level of 
reduction could save the council an estimated £69,000 and 150tCO2per year. 
Brighton and Hove City Council have a staff travel plan is a policy document for staff designed 
to reduce car use and provide improved travel options for employees both in journeys to and 
from work and within the working day. This staff plan is include as part of the induction 
process. There is also an easit network in the city which includes discounts on rail and bus.Co-benefits
•Increasing physical activity could save the NHS £17bn 
within 20 years by reducing the prevalence of conditions 
such as type 2 diabetes and heart disease. 
•Reduced congestion -sustainable transport can help reduce 
the number of vehicles on the road. 
•Encourages safer driving practices.  
•Reduction in mileage can also reduce fuel costs.04 –ACTION PLANNING
TRANSPORTATION & FLEET –WIDER CONTEXT AND DELIVERY
Key legislation
•Active travel : a briefing for local authorities 
•In May 2020, the UK Government announced a £250 million emergency active travel fund, 
which is the “first stage of a £2 billion investment, and part of the £5 billion in new funding 
announced for cycling and buses in February.” The Government also published fast -tracked 
statutory guidance for local authorities to “make significant changes to their road layouts 
to give more space to cyclists and pedestrians”. 
•The Department for Transport Cycling and Walking Investment Strategy aims to make 
cycling and walking the natural choices for shorter journeysMonitoring Indicators
•Business travel mileage and mode 
•Employee commuting mileage and mode•Distance travel by RCVs 
•% staff trained in eco -driving Priority 1: Demand reduction
Box 1: Working from Home considerations
It is important to consider the carbon usage of an employee 
working from home. This is mainly dependent on the level of 
heating required, however there is limited evidence on the 
change in energy consumption of home workers. The 
effectiveness is also dependent on the avoided emissions 
associated with each commute e.g. distance, vehicle, 
number of passengers, age of vehicle, however this data is 
not available for HDC. Using averages from the Carbon Trust , 
a commuter would have to travel 4 miles to work (one -way) 
to balance the average increase in home energy consumption 
180 kg CO2e. It recommended that this is assessed for 
Horsham by consulting staff and measuring the impact of the 
current home working changes implemented under COVID -19.79 Horsham District Council |Action PlanningPriority 2: Alternative Fuels
Switch to alternative low carbon vehicles and fuel for council fleet.1
Enabling Actions Description Estimated Cost Stakeholders Implementation
Increase EV charging 
infrastructureContinue to work with 
West Sussex CC to co -
ordinate installation of 
charge points in the 
district as well as onsite 
charge points.50kW charging point: £17,000 -
£33,000.
Note this does not include an 
estimate for renewable energy 
generation.West Sussex 
County Council 
and Transport 
managerThis is an ongoing initiative with West Sussex County Council to increase 
charging points int the county.
•Continue working with County Council to map electric charging points 
in strategic locations across the district.
•Assess the need for installation of additional capacity at office and 
workshop sites.
Timeframe: <5 years
Actions Description Estimated Cost Carbon 
savingStakeholders Implementation
Trial low 
carbon Large 
Goods Vehicles 
(LGVs)Ultimately, HDC should 
aim for zero carbon HGVs, 
however there is yet to be 
an established alternative. 
Therefore, HDC should 
seek funding to trial low 
carbon LGVS/HGVS and 
alternative fuels, with the 
long term goal to switch 
all LGVs. Estimates 
provided are based on 
switching to electric RCVs.An electric RCV costs 
approximately £201,580 
(£5,845,820 for whole 
fleet) more than 
equivalent diesel RCVs. 
However, the lower 
running costs of an 
electric RCV mean that 
the total cost of 
ownership is £29,608 
greater for an electric 
RCV over its lifetime 
(£858,632 for whole 
fleet).1,110 
tCO 2Transport 
managerThe council fleet currently contains nearly 30 large goods vehicles. 
Through discussions with HDC, it is understood that the LGV fleet is 
relatively new, and there are currently no plans to replace vehicles until 
around 2027. However, early replacement of some vehicles for a trial is 
feasible. Cost constraints (particularly in light of COVID -19) mean 
additional funding would be beneficial in achieving this -leasing could also 
be an option.
•Review alternative fuels and the options available for low carbon LGVs 
e.g. it is difficult to evidence costs for hydrogen fuel at the time of 
writing so this could be reviewed.
•Explore and seek funding opportunities for trialling low carbon LGVs.
•Consider partnering with local businesses developing alternative fuels.
Timeframe: 3 years04 –ACTION PLANNING
TRANSPORTATION & FLEET –ACTION PLAN -CARBON REDUCTION
1Fleet size may have reduced since 2018/19 footprint so estimates may need to be revised80 Horsham District Council |Action Planning04 –ACTION PLANNING
TRANSPORTATION & FLEET –ACTION PLAN -CARBON REDUCTION
Priority 2: Switch to alternative low carbon vehicles and fuel for council fleet.
Actions Description Estimated Cost Carbon 
savingStakeholders Implementation
Switch to EV 
cars/vansSwitch 100% of 
car/van fleet to 
electric vehicles 
when undergoing 
fleet replacement. An additional £1,350,000 above 
the cost for Euro VI for the 
whole car/van fleet. However, 
the lower operational costs of 
EVs mean that over the lifetime 
of the vehicles the additional 
cost would be £930,000 above 
Euro VI. (This does not factor in 
any programme of 
replacement). 
The Energy Saving Trust offer a 
free Ultra -Low Emissions Vehicle 
review107 tCO 2e 
(100% switch 
powered by 
grid)
164 tCO 2e 
(100% powered 
by renewable 
generation)Transport 
manager and 
procurement 
teamAt present it is understood that the HDC fleet has a turnover of 
around 6 vehicles/ year, so our estimation of 30 vehicles over a 5 
year period is credible, if a compelling case can me made. 
Potential barriers cited include a lack of charging infrastructure 
and concern over battery life -these could be addressed through 
the anticipated increase in Charging Infrastructure. HDC already 
operate 3 EVs (1 car and 2 vans).
•Review cycle of replacement for vehicles and develop a 
strategic plan for vehicle replacement. 
•Assess capacity for renewable energy generation on site.
•Educate staff on EVs and address concerns over mileage etc. 
Upskill drivers and mechanics.
Timeframe: 5 years81 Horsham District Council |Action PlanningExamples of Best Practice 
Cheshire East Green Hydrogen Refuelling -Cheshire East Council are working with Storengy
under a £1m funding scheme to trial two hydrogen bin wagons. The hydrogen will be produced 
in the least carbon intensive way at a new facility in the borough. It is supported by both 
public and private sector funding a grant from the LEP . 
Nottingham City Council was part of a pilot EU funded scheme, CleanMobilEnergy3 to roll out 
electric vehicle waste collection trucks powered by renewable energy through a smart energy 
management scheme. 
TheCity of London will be the first council to implement a fully electric fleet, as part of a 
new contract with Veolia, whilst several other councils, including Sheffield andWestminster, 
are also trialling the technology Co-benefits
•Financial benefit of electric vehicles -Electric vehicles can 
offer substantial fuel savings. For instance, electric cars 
typically cost £2 -£4 to fully charge, for a range of 100 miles 
where as a petrol or diesel car costs £13 to £16 to drive 100 
miles (approximately 5 times more). 
•Improvement in air quality -The cost to the economy of 
pre-mature deaths related to poor air quality is estimated 
to be £54bn a year.
•Improving air quality can also help to reduce health 
inequalities –air pollution levels have been found to have 
strong association with deprivation levels.04 –ACTION PLANNING
TRANSPORTATION & FLEET –WIDER CONTEXT AND DELIVERY
Key legislation
•TheUK government has the ambition to stop the sale of 
petrol and diesel cars by 2040 and instead switch entirely 
to electric vehicles.
•Go Ultra Low is a national scheme aiming to inform and 
promote the savings associated with switching to EV.
•UK Road to Z eroStrategy -The Road to Zero Strategy sets 
out a path for Britain to be a world leader in the zero -
emission revolutionMonitoring Indicators
•Number of charging points on council property and in the district
•% of fleet that is low emission 
•Air quality monitoringPriority 2: Switch to alternative low carbon vehicles and fuel for council fleet.
Leeds City Council have electrified 16% of their total van fleet. 
It is estimated that these vehicles will travel 450,000 miles per 
year leading to fuel savings of £13,500 per year and savings of 52 
tCO2to 2020.04 –ACTION 
PLANNING
D) PROPERTY
21%of total footprint 
of Scope 1 and 2 
emissions
63
%The emissions from property were estimated as 3,927 tCO2e which represents over one fifth of the 
councils total footprint. As the largest emissions category for Scope 1 and 2 emissions (gas and 
electricity), it is important that the council review their own operations and properties in order to 
reduce emissions. Property also makes up a significant proportion of Scope 3 emissions through leased 
buildings. Although this is not within direct control, the council must work with tenants to go beyond 
national legislation.
of Scope 3 emissions
12%Electricity
8% Gas
5%
Water
0%Leased 
Buildings
9%
<1%
Emission 
Source2018/2019 
tCO2
Scope 1
Gas 735
Scope 2
Electricty 1,363
Scope 3
Gas Upstream 102
Electricity T&D 116
Water 21
Leased 
buildings1,590
Total 3,927Property emissions 
breakdown by scopeTop 5 emitting properties (all scopes)
Building Name Emissions Category 2018/2019 tCO2
Parkside Electricity (+ T&D) 764
Parkside Gas (+ upstream) 454
The Forum (Retail Unit 1) Leased Building 278
The Capitol Gas (+ upstream) 180
The Forum (Retail Unit 2) Leased Building 1600 200 400 600 800
Parkside (Elec)
Parkside (Gas)
The Forum (Retail Unit 1 - Leased)
The Capitol (Gas)
The Forum (Retail Unit 2 - Leased)tCO2
Total 2018/19 footprint with emissions 
from Property highlighted.10%
3%
52%2%3%1%4%0%0%8%3%
Car Park (10%) Community Facility (3%)
Main Council office; occupy one floor* (52%) Museum and Offices (2%)
Offices (3%) Other (3%)
Public Lighting (<1%) Residential (4%)
Retail (<1%) Storage (<1%)
The Forum (9%) Theatre (8%)
Workshop and office (3%)<1%
<1%11%
12%
25%2%
GP Practice/Dentist (11%)
Industrial Buildings (12%)
Offices (25%)
Retail (49%)
Sports and Recreation (2%)No.tCO2
5179
44197
18397
41786
231No.tCO2
744
129
10 47
43 51
3 5
1112No. tCO2
1 6
1 3
2444
36 124
1158
8304 –ACTION PLANNING
PROPERTY –FURTHER ANALYSIS
Horsham District Council |Action PlanningLeased buildings (Scope 3) 
emissions by building categoryScope 2 property emissions by building category
No. tCO2
12 141
1704
5 46
3 7
20.3
1129
4 47Scope 1 property emissions by 
building category
1% 0%
60%17%
Emergency Services (1%)
Nature Reserve (<1%)
Offices (60%)
Residential (17%)
Theatre (21%)21%<1%
49%9%
3%84 Horsham District Council |Action Planning04 –ACTION PLANNING
PROPERTY –ACTION PLAN –ENABLING ACTIONS
Priority 1: Behaviour Change
Reducing energy demand based on how the buildings are used.
Enabling Actions Description Estimated Cost Stakeholders Implementation
Better report and 
feedback on energy 
consumptionReport on carbon emissions 
from buildings annually 
and feedback to staff.Within existing 
staff resources.Carbon Reduction 
Project Team.This is focused on properties that the council operates. Council staff will begin 
conducting their own footprint assessment this year so there is an opportunity 
to upskill individuals in carbon estimations and develop internal communication 
around the annual footprint. 
•Upskill individuals for annual calculation of footprint and how to estimate 
emissions from consumption data. 
•Develop an internal communication strategy for raising awareness of this.
•Share progress on reductions in consumption so staff can see how their 
actions can make an impact.
Timeframe: <1  year
Mandate 
consumption data 
from tenantsWork with tenants to 
gather carbon footprint or 
energy consumption data. 
In order to assess any 
progress made by tenants, 
data needs to be provided. 
The current method for 
estimation is based on 
typical consumptions per 
building type so will not 
reflect reductions achieved 
or support investment 
cases.Within existing 
staff resources.
Potential to use 
consultant for 
webinars.Property team and 
tenants.This is focused on the properties the council owns but leases out to a third 
party. The council do not currently receive data from tenants to include in 
their footprints, however it was felt that it would be possible to ask for this 
from tenants. 
•Develop a template for tenants to report carbon emissions or energy 
consumption data. 
•Hold a webinar/forum on this will all lessees to ensure understanding and 
that they are on board (voluntary basis).
Timeframe: <2 years. To be included in next footprint.85 Horsham District Council |Action Planning04 –ACTION PLANNING
PROPERTY –ACTION PLAN -CARBON REDUCTION
Priority 1: Behaviour Change
Actions Description Estimated Cost Carbon saving Stakeholders Implementation
Raise staff 
awareness 
through carbon 
literacy trainingRaise awareness of energy 
demand reduction activities 
amongst staff through a 
campaign and training.~£5,000 for 
education 
programme117 tCO 2e The HR team 
could co -
ordinate 
training of all 
staffBehaviour change of staff was cited as an important part of 
reducing energy demand. 
•Explore options for climate change awareness training or 
campaigns available. Further research required to assess how 
best to deliver training.
•Train senior leadership team and key officers in the council. 
Expand to all staff and councillors. 
•Embed into new starter training and performance reviews.  
•Share examples of best practice.
Timeframe: Train 50% of staff < 1 year
Guidance for 
tenantsProduce guidance for tenants 
on energy efficiency 
(technology and behaviour 
change) and energy supply. Additional staff 
resource -0.5 FTE20 tCO 2e
*Note this does not 
factor in savings 
from behaviour 
change or 
renewables Property team This is addressing the properties the council owns and leases out 
to third parties. It was felt that it may be difficult to influence 
tenant and make a business case for changes so providing 
guidance and education can help to address this. 
•Write to all tenants to make them aware of the councils target 
and commitments.
•Consult tenants on where there is a gap in understanding.
•Provide guidance and share own experiences on energy 
efficiency technologies, staff training and best practice.86 Horsham District Council |Action Planning04 –ACTION PLANNING
PROPERTY –ACTION PLAN -CARBON REDUCTION
Priority 1: Behaviour Change
Actions Description Estimated Cost Carbon saving Stakeholders Implementation
Decommission 
buildingsIf there is a long term 
behavioural shift of staff to 
working from home then the 
council could explore 
decommissioning buildings. 
However, it is important that 
these emissions are not just 
passed onto the others in the 
district and it is encouraged 
that decommissioned 
buildings are sold for 
redevelopment.Agency & 
transaction fees 
would be incurred 
as part of the 
sale. 
Cost savings will 
be achieved 
through avoidance 
of energy bills and 
business rate 
charges from new 
tenants. 137 tCO 2e
(average office 
building)Office workers 
and property 
teamThere was a general consensus that working from home had 
worked well and would be an easy to implement option. However, 
this must consider the impacts beyond the building. For instance, 
assessing the impact on the emissions of home workers heating 
their own homes. This may also just pass emissions onto another 
stakeholder in the district which does not contribute to reducing 
the emissions of the district and will not support the council’s 
corporate plan.
•Work with the transport team and HR team to assess long term 
changes in commuting behaviour post -Covid 19. 
•Review building use and demand. 
•Ensure that any assessment on decommissioning includes a 
consideration of the impacts on the wider district and aims to 
mitigate this by encouraging redevelopment to a high standard.87 Horsham District Council |Action PlanningExamples of Best Practice 
Manchester City Council have trained over 1,000 members of council staff in carbon 
literacy, with large scale training sessions underway for the top 300 managers. 
Islington Borough Council raising awareness amongst staff of energy efficiency 
measures will save £43,000 and 196 tCO2per year. 
Co-benefits
•Raising staff awareness and training programmes can increase buy -in to climate 
policies. Engagement helps to build consensus, which may enable the council to 
deliver more ambitious low carbon policies. 
•Staff can take what they have learnt into their communities and spread the 
message beyond the council. 
•Improvements made by tenants will also benefit the wider district’s carbon 
footprint. 04 –ACTION PLANNING
PROPERTY –WIDER CONTEXT AND DELIVERY
Monitoring Indicators
•% of staff carbon literate certified
•Recognition awards for low -carbon behaviour / prizes 
•Number of tenants engaged on climate changePriority 1: Behaviour Change
88 Horsham District Council |Action Planning04 –ACTION PLANNING
PROPERTY –ACTION PLAN -ENABLING ACTIONS
Priority 2: Energy Efficiency
Reduce energy demand from council properties through improving building fabric and installing energy efficient appliances.
Enabling Actions Description Estimated Cost Stakeholders Implementation
Embed carbon into 
asset management 
strategyIntegrate low -carbon retrofit into 
maintenance cycles and ensure 
carbon impact is considered in the 
operation of buildings.
This will highlight opportunities 
where assets are to be replaced 
anyway, and costs for low -carbon 
substitution are therefore more 
marginal and more easily justified. Within existing 
budgetsProperty Team There is already work underway by the property team at the council to 
map the 5 year plans in line with building upgrades. 
•Review Asset Management strategy and incorporate a way to assess 
and monitor the carbon impact of actions.
Timeframe: < 1 year
Lobby national 
governmentLobby national government to 
increase the standards of building 
regulations and energy efficiency.Minimal additional 
staff resourceProperty Team There was discussion of legislative barriers from key officers in terms of 
building regulations and Minimum Energy Efficiency Standards which set 
the standards for building performance. The council should look to go 
beyond these regulations and lobby national government to increase 
standards. Whilst other parties and professional bodies can play a part in 
lobbying, this will help wider district activities in the future.
•This involves responding to consultations, aligning and co -ordinating 
with other councils to demand the legislation necessary to achieve 
national targets.
Timeframe: < 6 months, ongoing89 Horsham District Council |Action Planning04 –ACTION PLANNING
PROPERTY –ACTION PLAN -CARBON REDUCTION
Priority 2 : Energy Efficiency
Actions Description Estimated Cost Carbon saving Stakeholders Implementation
Retrofit 
owned 
buildingsRetrofit own -
building stock to 
increase efficiency 
by upgrading 
insulation and 
heating systems. Investment grade audits 
can be commissioned per 
building ranging £2,000 -
£5,000.
Residential -retrofitting 
to Energiesprong
standard -£4.9m
Non-domestic buildings -
£7.7 million. 
1 FTE to support carbon 
reduction across 
property.Residential -
Energiesprong
standard saves 145 
tCO 2e
Non-domestic 
buildings: retrofit 
saves 332 tCO 2e 
(Ashden estimate 
of insulation 
improvements) to 
1,983 tCO 2e (zero 
carbon buildings)
Total: 497 -2,128 
tCO 2e. Property team Work has already begun to map out 5 year plans for the property 
portfolio which should be continued. This action is aimed at council 
assets that are both owned and operated.
There were concerns from some council officers on the cost -benefit of 
such retrofit and whether properties would still be owned by the 
council in the future. 
Carry out an assessment of the stock to identify potential programmes:
-Data gap in -fills through site visits
-Building performance modelling on key areas for improvements
-Investment grade audits to identify opportunities to gain returns.
Integrate with 5 year plan of building maintenance and map 
opportunities for building improvements. Demanding the highest 
energy efficiency standards when opportunities to retrofit arise.
Timeframe: <10 years
Energy saving 
technologiesEnsuring that lights 
and appliances 
used in council 
buildings are the 
most energy 
efficient option.Minimal 26 tCO 2e Property team This was identified as a good opportunity to reduce emissions by staff 
during consultation. This is applicable to properties the council 
operates, not those leased out. 
•Update procurement policy to ensure all council appliances and 
office items are sustainable and the most energy efficient.
•Review opportunities to replace existing appliances and lighting.
•Monitor energy usage and assess the impact of changes made. 
Timeframe: 5 years90 Horsham District Council |Action Planning04 –ACTION PLANNING
PROPERTY –ACTION PLAN -CARBON REDUCTION
Priority 2 : Energy Efficiency
Actions Description Estimated Cost Carbon saving Stakeholders Implementation
Energy saving 
technologiesFor public lighting on streets 
and in car parks, the council 
should ensure they are 
operating at maximum energy 
efficiency.~£350,000 to 
replace 1,000 
streetlights120 kgCO 2e per 
1,000 streetlightsProperty team The council has already seen improvements in this by switching 
gas lamp and realised significant energy savings. The property 
team would be responsible for assessing the current emissions and 
delivering a replacement programme.
•Assess the footprint and opportunities to reduce consumption 
through switching to LED Lighting, sensors or reduced lighting.
•Develop a replacement programme, which also considers 
renewable energy generation as part of the design.
Retrofit 
properties let out 
when tenancies 
endSeek opportunities when 
properties are vacant to 
retrofit/improve energy 
efficiency. Investment grade 
audits can be 
commissioned per 
building ranging 
£2,000 -£5,000.
Estimated cost of 
£12.1 m to retrofit 
all leased 
buildings.89 tCO 2e (Ashden
estimate of 
insulation 
improvements) to 
1,590 tCO 2e (zero 
carbon buildings)Property team, 
working closely 
with tenants 
and prospective 
tenantsFrom stakeholder discussions this was viewed as difficult to 
implement and would not necessarily equate to the council 
receiving higher rent values. However, leased buildings are the 
2nd highest source of emissions for the council so important to 
target. 
•Review existing leasing arrangements and map potential 
opportunities for property improvement in line with 
refurbishment, maintenance or between occupancies. 
•Communicate with tenants the importance and value of 
building improvements.
Timeframe: in line with leasing's contracts91 Horsham District Council |Action PlanningExamples of Best Practice 
Cambridgeshire County Council adopted the Re:fit framework to increase energy efficiency, 
reduce CO2emissions and improve the condition of its buildings. The estimated potential of 
this scheme is to deliver 1.2 million tCO2savings over the lifetime of the project. The 
project is available to schools and public sector buildings in the county.Co-benefits
•Job creation: Creation of jobs and upskilling of local people. 
Two-thirds of jobs in the low carbon and renewable energy 
economy are in energy efficiency products sector. 
•Resilience: Greater protection against future energy price 
rises as well as being more physically resilient during 
heatwaves. 
•Financial savings: Improving the energy efficiency of buildings 
can reduce energy bills for organisations and individuals.04 –ACTION PLANNING
PROPERTY –WIDER CONTEXT AND DELIVERY
Key legislation
•The Future Homes Standard provides an update to  Part L of the building regulations 
•Minimum energy efficiency standards (MEES) in the private rented sector and non -
domestic property prevents landlords from letting properties rated below EPC Band E 
•The Government’s preferred target is that non -domestic property owners in the private 
sector achieve EPC band B ratings by 2030 across all properties 
•Salix Finance has been working with Local Authorities for over 15 years, investing over 
£360 million in energy efficiency projects. Monitoring Indicators
•Energy Performance Certificate ratings of council properties  
•Display Energy Certificates (DECs) for public estate 
•Energy efficiency ratings of appliancesPriority 2: Energy Efficiency 
92 Horsham District Council |Action Planning04 –ACTION PLANNING
PROPERTY –ACTION PLAN -CARBON REDUCTION
Priority 3: Green Energy
Any remaining supply after demand reductions have been implemented should be supplied with green energy.
Actions Description Estimated Cost Carbon saving Stakeholders Implementation
Increase 
renewable energy 
supplyConsider generating own low 
carbon energy supply with 
renewables e.g. solar. Additional staff 
time for energy 
opportunities 
mapping.
£800,000 for a 
1MW heat pump
Current supply 
does not offer a 
significant saving 
on non -renewable 
energy bills, 
whereas self 
generation would. 1,063 tCO 2e Property and 
procurement 
teamsSince the 2018/19 footprint was carried out, the council have 
procured a renewable electricity provider. They also have some 
solar PV installed at 3 sites. The next step would be to improve 
and increase on -site generation. 
•At a minimum, challenge the quality/ nature of green energy 
provided and ensure it provides necessary benefits.
•Explore pairing with disruptive energy providers that offer 
more tailored and holistic solutions for energy supply, usage, 
storage and generation. 
•Carry out energy opportunities mapping exercise and conduct a 
cost benefit analysis of installing own renewable electricity 
generation. 
•If generation on own property is limited, explore the potential 
for a Power Purchase Agreement (PPA) with other local 
organisations, or other commercial partners. Note, emissions 
reductions can only be realised if HDC use the energy, if they 
are an ‘ offtaker ’ and keep hold of the renewable energy 
generation certificates (REGOs).93 Horsham District Council |Action PlanningExamples of Best Practice 
Warrington borough council are the first local authority to have 100% solar 
energy supply. Solar farm is located out of boundary and is connected 
locally to the grid; supply is thus offset rather than being locally sourced.  
Forest Heath Council own the solar farm at Toggam Farm, Lakenheath and 
have used the proceeds to plug funding gaps in frontline services
Co-benefits
•Revenue generation: Potential to reduce utility bills and generate a long -
term source of income. 
•Economic resilience: Local energy resilience and protection against 
future fossil fuel price increases.  
•Job creation: Creation of jobs and upskilling of local people. In the UK, 
low carbon and renewable energy activities generated £44.5 billion 
turnover in 2017, directly employing 209,500 people (full -time 
equivalents). 04 –ACTION PLANNING
PROPERTY –WIDER CONTEXT AND DELIVERY
Key legislation
•UK National Energy and Climate Plan sets out integrated climate and 
energy objectives, targets, policies and measures for the period 2021 -
2030  
•The UK government has set a target to achieve 15% of its energy 
consumption from renewable sources by 2020. 
•Renewable Heat Incentive (RHI) Grant has recently been refreshed and 
will offer capital grants. It helps businesses, public sector and non -profit 
organisations meet the cost of installing renewable heat technologiesMonitoring Indicators
•Installed capacity (MW/kW)  
•kWh generatedPriority 3: Green Energy 
94 Horsham District Council |Action Planning04 –ACTION PLANNING
PROPERTY –ACTION PLAN -ENABLING ACTION
Priority 4: New Properties 
Ensure that any new property built or bought into the portfolio meeting the highest green building standards. This is key for limiting the increase in the councils 
footprint with growth of the property portfolio.
Enabling Actions Description Estimated Cost Stakeholders Implementation
Lobby national 
governmentLobby national government to 
increase the standards for new 
properties in terms of energy 
efficiency. 
This is not intended to serve as a 
substitute for progressing other 
actions.Minimal -
additional staff 
resourceProperty team This is in relation to Part L building regulations and MEES -the council 
should look to go beyond these regulations and lobby national 
government to increase standards. Whilst other parties and professional 
bodies can play a part in lobbying, this will help wider district activities 
in the future.
•This involves responding to consultations, aligning and co -ordinating 
with other councils to demand the legislation necessary.
Timeframe: < 6 months, ongoing
95 Horsham District Council |Action Planning04 –ACTION PLANNING
PROPERTY –ACTION PLAN -CARBON REDUCTION
Priority 4: New Properties
Actions Description Estimated Cost Carbon saving Stakeholders Implementation
High green 
building standards 
for new 
propertiesIf the Council 
were to develop 
new property 
ensure it is 
designed in line 
with the highest 
green building 
and energy 
performance 
standards 
e.g. LEED or 
BREEAM.
AECB and 
PassivHaus
standards for 
residential 
property.New buildings to LEED Gold 
standard estimated to be c. 
10% additional on capital costs 
although operational cost 
savings should more than 
compensate this premium over 
the lifetime of the building.
The difference between a 
BREEAM ‘pass’ and an 
‘excellent’ rating for offices is 
shown to incur an increase in 
capital cost of 0.8%.
Building costs of Passivhaus for 
residential properties is 
approximately 7% higher.
There is an uplift in costs for 
increased energy performance 
and performance will be 
maximised subject to viability.The average CO 2
saving for a 
BREEAM assessed 
building is 22% 
and a BREEAM 
Excellent rated 
building is 
expected to 
reduce carbon 
emissions by 33%. 
1,360 kgCO 2/year 
saving for an 
average 
Passivhaus 
residential 
property. This 
equates to 68 
tCO 2e over the 
lifetime of a 
property (c.50 
years).Property team This needs important consideration given the potential to 
decommission larger office spaces and move to smaller ones. 
The council has a good record for pushing for higher EPC ratings 
but they are encouraged to take this further with these green 
industry standards.
This applies to both properties the council will operate and those 
which they plan to let out. 
•Map out projected growth of property portfolio and estimate 
the impact on the carbon footprint. If limited data, the same 
method used in the footprint calculation can be applied. To 
assess the improvement from current EPC rating, site audits 
should be carried out to provide an accurate estimate. 
•Develop a policy that all new properties will be BREEAM/LEED 
or similar industry standard. 
•Identify sources of finance of programme funding.
•Liaise with LEED/BREEAM and the carbon neutral team to agree 
a strategy for implementation. 
Timeframe: update of policy <1 year96 Horsham District Council |Action PlanningExamples of Best Practice 
In a move towards more sustainable and zero carbon buildings the Welsh Government (WG) 
Planning Policy now requires projects with a floor area greater than 1000m2 to achieve a 
BREEAM Very Good rating. In addition, WG require an Excellent rating to be achieved for 
projects where they provide core funding. 
Exeter Passivhaus Leisure Centre -As part of Exeter City Council's city centre master plan, this 
is set to be a world first Passivhaus leisure centre. It is the first commercial Passivhaus 
development from the council who have delivered several domestic schemes. The design 
includes 70% saving on energy costs when compared to a current good practice pool and a 50% 
reduction in water use. Local news report suggest the cost of the leisure centre in £44 
million. 
Brent London Borough Council BREEAM Outstanding civic centre -the multi -use building 
achieved a 92% BREEAM score and was rated outstanding for its low impact design. At the time 
it was the UK's greenest public building. Co-benefits
•Lower operational costs -Energy efficiency and water saving 
technology has a forecast payback is typically less than 5 
years for energy and less than 2 years for water. 
•Benefits to those who work within these offices through 
factors such as better air quality and lighting. 
•Leading by example and demonstrate to other stakeholders 
in the district that this level of ambition is feasible and 
share insights on the savings and benefits. 04 –ACTION PLANNING
PROPERTY –WIDER CONTEXT AND DELIVERY
Monitoring Indicators
•Display Energy Certificate (DEC) of new build and efficiency rating
•Certification e.g. BREEAM outstandingPriority 4: New Properties
04 –ACTION 
PLANNING 
E) PROCUREMENT & 
CONTRACTSThe emissions from procurement and contracts were estimated as 12,466 tCO2e which represent over 
two-thirds of the councils total footprint. As the largest emissions category in the 2018/19 footprint, 
HDC should also look to reduce emissions from its supply chain by working with suppliers to minimise 
their footprint. These emissions sit within Scope 3 of the council’s footprint. This means it is not 
within direct control of the council, however it is deemed to be within stronger influence by updating 
the procurement process to award suppliers who are taking action to reduce emissions. 
*Please note there were errors identified by the 
officers leading procurement services at the council 
in the annual contract values. The council will re -
calculate emissions from this sector and values may 
change, however the actions discussed overleaf are 
still applicable.
 -  2,000  4,000  6,000  8,000Nonresidential maintenance and repair servicesWaste management and remediation servicesBuildings and dwellings servicesMuseums, historical sites, zoos, and parksFitness and recreational sports centersEmployment servicesOffice administrative servicesCommercial and industrial machinery and equipment rental…Agriculture and forestry support activitiesHunting and trapping activitiesMonetary authorities and depository credit intermediationReal estate servicesAccounting, tax preparation, bookkeeping, and payroll servicesInsurance agencies, brokerages, and related activities
tCO2
68%of total footprint 
83
%of Scope 3 emissionsContracts
68%
Total 2018/19 footprint with emissions 
from Procurement highlighted.98 Horsham District Council |Action Planning04 –ACTION PLANNING
PROCUREMENT –ACTION PLAN -ENABLING ACTIONS
Priority 1: Sustainable Procurement
Drive carbon reductions from contractors and suppliers through implementing sustainable procurement policies and processes
Enabling Actions Description Estimated Cost Stakeholders Implementation
Effective contract 
managementEncourage more effective contract 
management and monitor contracts 
commitments to hold suppliers to 
account.
This is essential in ensuring 
commitments made on sustainability 
criteria are delivered.Within existing 
staff resources.Contract 
managersConsensus from stakeholder working groups was that this would not be a 
significant administrative burden. 
•Review current process and consult staff on barriers to effective 
contract management.
•Develop a plan to improve contract management and address the 
barriers.
•Continue to deliver and review training provided to contract managers.
Timeframe: <1 year
Better supplier data 
and reportingCollection of more detailed data on 
suppliers and requirement for 
suppliers to report their carbon 
footprint back to the council. 
This is necessary to monitor if 
progress is made. Methods currently 
rely on a carbon footprint per £ spent 
which will not reflect reductions.Cost mainly to 
supplier.
Cost to HDC 
accounted for in 
job role of annual 
footprint analysis.Carbon reduction 
team and 
Suppliers.It was agreed that this would be helpful in constructing the annual 
council footprint and help to monitor progress. 
•Develop a template for data provision and guidance on data collection. 
•Set a date and process for annual reporting from suppliers –could be 
an annual figure based on financial year reporting.
•This may be included as part of a sustainable procurement policy.
•For existing suppliers, this could be done voluntarily or through agreed 
legal changes to the contract.
Timeframe: <1 year
Increased weighting 
of social valueConsider increasing the weighting of 
social value in criteria to ensure that 
sustainability has a greater influence 
in evaluation. Within existing 
staff resources.Shared 
Procurement 
ServicesThe general consensus amongst officer was that this would be easy to 
implement and a good opportunity to prompt suppliers to reduce carbon. 
However, it was acknowledged that this could increase cost.
•Review current social value weighting and implications of increasing to 
10 -30%. Potential to assess this on a case by case basis. 
Timeframe: <1 year99 Horsham District Council |Action Planning04 –ACTION PLANNING
PROCUREMENT –ACTION PLAN -CARBON REDUCTION
Priority 1: Sustainable Procurement
Actions Description Estimated Cost Carbon saving Stakeholders Implementation
Sustainable 
procurement 
policyIntroduce a 
sustainable 
procurement 
policy or 
charter Within existing staff resources. 3,340 tCO 2e per 
yearShared 
Procurement 
Services and 
Contract 
ManagersCrawley Borough Council already have a Social Value Charter 
which includes a number of sustainable procurement and 
environmental requirements -we advise exploring collaboration 
where possible, particularly as HDC's contracts are managed as 
part of a shared procurement service. The policy can be applied 
across all HDC's contracts, although in practice it may be 
targeted at larger suppliers first. Additional support may be 
needed for smaller suppliers. 
•Review best practice for a sustainable procurement policy.
•Write to current suppliers and ask them to voluntarily sign up 
to the principles. 
•Ensure all new contracts include ambitious sustainability 
commitments.
Timeframe <1 year
Supplier 
requirementsRequire 
suppliers to 
set SBTs/have 
a climate 
strategy or 
targetNo direct cost to council, cost on 
supplier for Environment strategy or 
SBT process. SBTitarget validation: 
The target validation service costs 
USD 4,950, which includes up to two 
target assessments.
Other target methods may also be 
available, for example, see the City of 
Manchester approach . 524 tCO 2e 
reduction from 
base year every 
year. This would 
increase yearly 
e.g. after 5 years 
the saving would 
be 2,618 tCO 2e.Shared 
Procurement 
Services, 
Contract 
Managers and 
SuppliersFrom officer discussions, asking to suppliers to set the own 
targets in line with the council was seen as another good 
opportunity for encouraging reductions. This was deemed 
particularly relevant for bigger suppliers. 
•Assess type of commitments the council would like to see from 
suppliers e.g. in line with the district wide target.
•Liaise and support suppliers to set their own targets.
Timeframe: 3 years100 Horsham District Council |Action PlanningExamples of Best Practice 
Cornwall Council developed a Responsible Procurement Policy which includes its commitment 
to environmental sustainability. They also have a Supply Chain Development Programme in 
order to inform suppliers about the tender process and are improving communication between 
the council and the market. 
Lambeth Council have introduced mandatory carbon reporting as part of their procurement 
process and have written to engage all current suppliers with the net zero challenge. They 
have issued a responsible procurement guidance and will be monitoring its impact. Their 
approach gives a 30% weighting to social value which includes carbon reduction measures.
Crawley Borough Council have introduced a Social Value Charter. Suppliers are asked to 
commit to the SVC either on a voluntary or mandatory basis depending on the value of the 
contract as part of the procurement process. The charter includes commitments to apply 
environmentally friendly and sustainable business practices.
City of Manchester have used the borough wide target as a short -hand way of indicating the 
scale of change needed for a variety of suppliers / businesses and organisations within the 
city. Some have subsequently sought a SBTicertified target after.Co-benefits
•Better contract management could also lead to cost savings 
and enforcement of other social value commitments. This 
can also help to build relationship with suppliers
•Working with suppliers to reduce their own carbon 
emissions and those in the supply chain may also contribute 
to the reduction in emissions of the wider district.
•Increase resilience by encouraging suppliers to make 
changes now can help to protect them as the market 
changes and the economy shift to low carbon.04 –ACTION PLANNING
PROCUREMENT –WIDER CONTEXT AND DELIVERY
Key legislation
•Social Value Act 2012 –social value required in all relevant 
procurements
The government website has a series of Sustainable 
procurement tools to define what this means in public 
procurement and provide guidance on good practice. For 
example:
•Government Buying Standards –This sets out mandatory 
and best practice product specifications for public sector 
procurement. 
•Sustainable procurement training -The National 
Sustainable Public Procurement Programme provides 
training on sustainable procurement Monitoring Indicators
•Number of suppliers reporting emissions and completeness of footprint.
•Number of suppliers with carbon reduction target and plans in place.
•Existing assessment methods in place for contract management and review.
•Annual reporting of social value assessments and weighting.Priority 1: Drive carbon reductions from contractors and suppliers through implementing sustainable procurement policies and processes04 –ACTION 
PLANNING 
F) PARKS & 
COUNTRYSIDEThe role of Parks & Countryside
In Chapter 2, we provided background around the potential role of HDC’s Parks & Countryside 
as a means through which to address residual emissions. In this Action Plan, we further explore 
opportunities in this area. 
HDC Parks & Countryside Profile
HDC owns and manages approximately 400 hectares of green space. There are 3 major parks in 
the district; Horsham Park, Southwater Country Park, and Warnham Local Nature Reserve. In 
addition, HDC manages 6 open spaces, along with cemeteries, allotments and sports facilities. 
Management of the parks is underpinned by HDC’s Green Space Strategy , of which a key goal is 
the protection of green space for its role in climate change mitigation. Chessworth Farm is also 
a valuable area of land, with significant biodiversity, that the council manages.
Horsham District’s sequestration potential
Reviewing net emission associated with Land Use, Land Use Change, and Forestry (LULUCF), we 
can assess the contribution of green space and the human impact on it, in the context of the 
accumulation, or release, of carbon stocks. 
We have reviewed BEIS local authority based territorial CO2emissions data for the entirety of 
Horsham District. LULUCF (comprising forest, cropland, grassland, wetlands, settlements, and 
harvested wood) net emissions comprised -71.4 kTCO2. Total emissions for the district, 
including impacts outside LULUCF , were 649.1kT CO2. This shows that the sequestration 
potential of land use in HDC has a substantial (>10%) impact on the broader emissions profile, 
indicating that land use should be a major consideration in any carbon mitigation strategy in 
the district. 
102 Horsham District Council |Action Planning04 –ACTION PLANNING
PARKS & COUNTRYSIDE –ACTION PLAN
Priority 1 : Sequestration Mapping  
Carry out mapping to identify existing natural capital stock, opportunities to enhance it and offsetting requirements .
Enabling Actions Description Estimated Cost Stakeholders Implementation
Assessment of 
carbon 
sequestration of 
current land and 
identify 
opportunities to 
increase 
sequestrationReview existing data on land -use in 
the district to identify opportunities 
for carbon sequestration through 
nature -based climate solutions. 
Sequestration opportunities could 
take the form of tree and hedgerow 
planting, or restoration of ecosystems 
including wetlands, peatland, 
grasslands, pasture, and soils. 
Mapping of the district as a whole 
would also be beneficial for a wider 
offsetting strategy.Consultant support 
in the delivery of 
the assessment is 
estimated to cost 
in the region of 
£5,000.
Additional staff 
resource –0.5 FTE.Parks & 
Countryside teamHDC's Parks and Countryside strategy does not currently integrate carbon, 
so this offers a significant opportunity to bring this element to decision -
making. At present there is no in -house resource to undertake an 
assessment of this type -training or outsourcing would be required. 
Stakeholders have highlighted the potential for sequestration in marginal 
land such as industrial sites. 
Decision makers should consider take a holistic view of the local 
ecosystem, and be aware that alternatives to tree planting may be better 
suited to some areas. 
•Explore methods and the associated limitations of approaches to 
assigning a carbon value to natural capital.
•Training of staff member in carbon assessment for land types. 
•Ensure mapping includes existing stock but also opportunities for 
enhancing stock.
Timeframe: <1 year103 Horsham District Council |Action Planning04 –ACTION PLANNING
PARKS & COUNTRYSIDE –ACTION PLAN
Priority 2: Protect and Enhance
Deliver the protection and enhancement opportunities identified in the mapping exercise. 
Enabling Actions Description Estimated Cost Stakeholders Implementation
Develop an 
offsetting strategyDefine the principles and priorities 
the council wishes to follow when 
approaching offsetting to achieve 
carbon neutrality e.g. certified 
status, out -of-boundary initiatives 
and insetting potential. In house strategy 
development or 
external 
consultants 
(£10,000)Carbon Reduction 
Team, Senior 
Leadership and 
Parks & 
Countryside teamIt was agreed with key stakeholders that offsetting should be the last 
resort for reducing emissions. However, given the council has carbon 
neutral ambitions, some degree of offsetting will be required, but this 
should be minimised as much as possible. 
•Firstly offsetting within boundary and on existing council land should 
be reviewed and enhanced where possible. 
•The next option is for the council to ether acquire land or support 
other land holders in the district to maximise sequestration.
•Other remaining residual emissions could apply the authority -based 
insetting mechanism and the council could fund local energy projects. 
•The final area to review is the council’s approach to out -of-boundary 
certified schemes ensuring that HDC can demonstrate additionality, 
permanence and verification. 
Timeframe: <2 years
Impose more 
ambitious carbon 
requirements on 
land being 
considered for 
development Explore potential opportunities 
through the planning system and local 
plan for either 1) acquiring land or 2) 
requiring developers to better 
manage land that is subject or 
adjacent to development.Within existing 
staff resourcesParks & 
Countryside 
team, working in 
partnership with 
Property and 
Planning teamsAll land acquisition plans will need to balance the need for housing, and 
competing funding requirements. This could in part be addressed by 
highlighting co -benefits associated with green space and the local 
population. The Environment Bill 2020 stipulates new requirements of a 
biodiversity net gain of at least 10% for new developments. 
•Include in local plan review alongside Wilder Horsham District.
Timeframe: 1 year104 Horsham District Council |Action Planning04 –ACTION PLANNING
PARKS & COUNTRYSIDE –ACTION PLAN
Priority 2: Protect and Enhance
Enabling Actions Description Estimated Cost Stakeholders Implementation
Integration of low -
carbon agenda with 
Wilder Horsham 
DistrictWilder Horsham District is a five -year 
partnership between Sussex Wildlife 
Trust and HDC that aims to help 
wildlife thrive. The primary aim is not 
related to carbon but there is overlap 
in protecting natural capital and 
engagement with land owners.Within existing 
staff resources.Sussex wildlife 
trust and Parks 
and Countryside 
teamReliant on partnership with external stakeholders. The initiative is 
focussed on land outside of HDC ownership, but does offer an opportunity 
to engage district residents and land owners. 
•Pool knowledge and activities that are thought to have carbon impacts 
and seek to quantify impacts, explore opportunities to accelerate or 
expand. 
•Set out a clear climate mitigation (and adaptation) strategy in 
partnership with Wilder Horsham District.
•Build on existing framework to engage with other landholders including 
farmers and communities to maximise the potential for tree planting 
and soil management.
Timeframe: 1 year
Explore 
opportunities to 
transfer ownership 
to wildlife trustBy transferring ownership it may 
increase the capacity of staff to 
develop nature based solutionsTransaction costs 
TBD
Offset by potential 
savings from 
reduced 
maintenance and 
staff time 
demanded. Sussex wildlife 
trust and Parks 
and Countryside 
teamThis would need to form part of a more robust natural capital strategy.
•Review long term goals and ownership of Wilder Horsham District and 
incorporate the carbon sequestration objectives into long term plans. 
Timeframe: <5 years105 Horsham District Council |Action Planning04 –ACTION PLANNING
PARKS & COUNTRYSIDE –ACTION PLAN
Priority 2: Protect and Enhance
Actions Description Estimated Cost Carbon saving Stakeholders Implementation
Protect current 
natural capital 
stockA key part of natural capital 
action is protecting the 
current stock from 
degradation. Within existing 
resources.TBD by mapping 
exercise (covered 
under Priority 1)Park & 
Countryside 
teamHDC's existing plan for tree stock management has a 5 year plan 
and associated funding secured. 
•Following on from mapping exercise, assess the potential risks 
to stock e.g. pests, development
•Produce a natural capital management strategy alongside 
Wilder Horsham District plans and budget.
•Incorporate into wider policies e.g. planning. 
Timeframe: 1 year
Heathland 
restorationContinuing to restore and 
protect heathland in the 
region which is an important 
carbon sink.Estimates on 
present value per 
ha <£10,000 over 
50 years.Dependent on 
management and 
restoration option 
and the data on 
this habitat shows 
huge variations Park & 
Countryside 
teamHeathland in HDC's ownership eligible for restoration is limited to 
around 60 acres, of which 35 acres has been subject to a 
restoration programme. A second stage for the remaining land is 
subject to funding. 
•Seek funding for continuing restoration. 
•Calculate carbon saving from restoration to date to support a 
business case.
Timeframe: <2 years
Increase natural 
capital stockIncrease tree and hedgerow 
planting and green 
infrastructure on existing land 
or acquired land to offset 
residual emissions.
Please note the estimates do 
not take into account existing 
stock£205,000 (based 
on £41 for 30 
trees).
0.5 FTEPlanting 148,000 
trees or planting 
on 92.5 ha of land 
would save 
approximately 355 
tCO 2 (approximate 
offsetting 
requirement)Park & 
Countryside 
teamAs raised by stakeholders, it is important that tree planting does 
not harm diversity and disrupt wildlife so this must be fully 
evaluated. This is only appropriate for land which is currently 
urban or has minimal carbon sequestration.
•Following opportunities mapping and any land acquisition 
activities, set targets for enhancement and develop a planting 
strategy that considers potential impacts.
Timeframe: 5 years.106 Horsham District Council |Action PlanningExamples of Best Practice 
Greater Manchester City of Trees is a leading example of how a tree planting project can 
address climate change objectives whilst engaging the local community and providing 
numerous co -benefits. So far, the initiative has planted 459,929 trees and involved 12,538 
people. It is aiming to plant 3 million trees and bring 2,000 hectares of unmanaged woodland 
back into community use.  
Greater Manchester Natural Capital Investment Plan aims to mobilise funding into natural 
capital projects in the region. The plan has three key components: 
1. A pipeline of potential project types which need investment; 
2. Finance models to facilitate private sector investment and the role of public sector
3. Recommendations to put the plan into practice over the next 5 years.
Newcastle City Council’s Green Infrastructure Delivery Framework highlights the co -benefits 
of green and blue infrastructure, particularly building on strategies to reduce flood risk. They 
have a local steering group as well as a monitoring and delivery plan. Co-benefits
•Tree planting has benefits for biodiversity, the environment 
(e.g. flood mitigation, heat regulation), individuals (e.g. 
spiritual connection to nature), society (e.g. recreation) 
and the economy (e.g. increased productivity resulting 
from the aforementioned factors). 
•Any landowner/ manager can potentially be involved, 
creating a diverse group of stakeholders including schools, 
farmers, corporate organisations and private landowners/ 
individuals04 –ACTION PLANNING
PARKS & COUNTRYSIDE –WIDER CONTEXT AND DELIVERY
Key legislation
•Land use: Policies for a Net Zero UK (2020) –CCC report 
sets out the policies and actions required  to deliver the 
land sector's contribution to the UK net zero target. 
•A Green Future: Our 25 Year Plan to Improve the 
Environment –sets out the government’s plans for the 
natural environment including embedding an environmental 
net gain principle into development. 
•The Environment Bill 2020 stipulates new requirements of a 
biodiversity net gain of at least 10% for new developments. Monitoring Indicators
•Tree/ green space cover
•Tree surveys 
•Completeness of mapping and granularity of 
data•Offsetting strategy in place
•Plant diversity metricsPriorities 1 and 2: Sequestration Mapping; Protecting and EnhancingIn this summary, the estimated impact of the opportunities in the preceding Action Plan are 
considered together with factors outside of direct council -led action to illustrate how Horsham 
District Council can achieve its emissions reduction goals. 
Savings are identified as:
•Council led actions -as set out in the action plan provided
•Grid decarbonisation -nationally led decarbonisation of the electricity grid -as set out in your 
“Business as Usual” scenario
•Authority based Insetting -Residual emissions can be targeted through authority based insetting 
and nature based solutions.  
Please note this represents a snapshot of the footprint in 2030 and 2050 and so does not 
represent cumulative emissions totals or reflect a carbon budget. The council must agree the 
timeline for action to work out yearly savings. This assumes that all actions have been 
completed by 2030.04 –ACTION 
PLANNING 
G) SUMMARY108 Horsham District Council |Action Planning04 –ACTION PLANNING
SUMMARY –CARBON BENEFITS AND COSTS
SectorAction 
GroupAnnual tCO2
SavingCapital CostsOperational/
Revenue CostsTime & 
Resource (FTE)Savings/Payback Notes
TransportPriority 1 310 £2,000 £2,000 2-3 months Reduced fuel costs Includes some installation of bike facilities.
Priority 2 1,217 £7,150,000Electricity 
cost, repairs0£5,315,000 
(lifetime fuel 
savings and tax)Carbon savings based on switching RCVs and cars/vans to electric. 
Cost -based on additional costs and savings for electric vehicles 
(over diesel/petrol). Does not include renewable electricity 
generation.
Sub Total 1,527 £7,152,000 £2,000 2-3 months
PropertyPriority 1 137 £0 £5,000 0.5 FTEReduced energy 
billsBased on carbon literacy training.
Priority 2 612 £24,950,000Energy bills, 
maintenance1 FTEReduced energy 
billsBased on residential retrofit to energiesprong standard. Non -
domestic saving takes the lower estimate and costs are based on 
HDC scaling of a previous audit. 
Priority 3 1,063 £800,000Energy bills, 
maintenance0Revenue 
generationBased on 1MW heat pump but other options are available. This is 
not based on an assessment of required capacity.
Priority 4 N/A N/A N/A N/ANot included in savings as it is based on limiting increases in 
emissions
Sub Total 1,812 £25,750,000 £5,000 1.5 FTE
Parks & 
CountrysidePriority 1 
& 2355 £205,000 Maintenance 1 FTEBased on tree planting to offset residual emissions, does not 
consider existing stock.
Procurement Priority 1 5381 £0 £0 0Sustainable Procurement Policy is assumed to incorporate carbon 
reduction targets already being addressed through an SBT.
Total 9,075 £33,107,000 £7,000 2.5 FTEThe table summarises the annual reductions in carbon emissions and the cost associated with each priority action (not includi ng enabling actions). The carbon 
savings have been presented for the 2030 target date. Where a quantitative estimate of a cost was not available, a qualitative description has been provided.3348
+0-117-24 -450
-1,217
-148
-560
-477
-355
05001000150020002500300035004000tCO2e
109 Horsham District Council |Action Planning04 –ACTION PLANNING
SCOPE 1 & 2 –SUMMARY OF MEASURESThis chart represents an aggregation of the various council -led 
carbon savings relevant to Scope 1&2, from the above Action Plan 
and the Business as Usual Scenario, to provide an indication of the 
extent to which applying each action would bring HDC closer to Net 
Zero. Please review the assumptions in Appendix 7.
Key Observations
•Council led actions have the potential to reduce HDC emissions by 
58% ( 1,956 tCO2e)
•Actions associated with low emissions vehicles had decisively the 
biggest impact potential (primarily due to the impact of low 
carbon LGVs) 
•Outside of council -led action, nationally led decarbonisation of 
the electricity grid will reduce HDC emissions by 17% ( 560tCO2e)
•After applying the carbon reduction actions, residual emissions 
amounted to a remaining 832 tCO2e. These are targeted through 
authority based insetting. 
The remaining emissions from electricity consumption from HDC 
property reduced through procuring green zero -emissions electricity. 
The remaining emissions from fleet are also reduced by ensuring the 
electricity supplying EVs is from 100% renewable sources. Residual emissions
Offsetting or insetting based activities –this would equate to planting 
of 148,000 trees by 2030 (based on 14,800 trees per year until 2030) 
or 92.5 hectares of tree planting1or could involve energy projects in 
the district.Grid decarbonisation
Emissions achieved through grid decarbonisation
1*This does not take into account existing stock£5 k
£350 k
£12.5 m
£7.15 m
£2k
£ -
£800 k£ 205 k£ capital costtCO2e saved
*Please note these categories do not directly 
reflect each priority as this includes only actions 
that impact Scope 1 and 2.15003
+0-5,786
-9,217
02000400060008000100001200014000160001800020000
2018 Scope
3Council Led
ActionsResidual
Emissions2050tCO2e
110 Horsham District Council |Action Planning04 –ACTION PLANNING
SCOPE 3 –SUMMARY OF MEASURES
This chart illustrates the impact of the proposed council led actions to address Scope 3 
emissions. Council led reductions are aggregated, and include procurement (which constitutes 
93% of the reduction), leased buildings , commuting and business travel. 
Key Observations
If fully implemented, council led actions lead to a reduction of 5,786 tCO2e, with residual 
emissions remaining after council led action equalling 9,217 tCO2e.
This further illustrates the need for offsetting or Authority Based Insetting. A target of Net Zero 
Scope 3 emissions by 2050 brings you in line to benefit from wider reductions in the district in 
line with the UK’s target to bring all emissions to Net Zero by 2050. To promote further emissions 
reductions, the council needs to further engage key suppliers and work to address key emission 
sources in the wider district, such as through: 
•Renewable energy supply
•Reduced travel
•Building retrofitResidual emissions
Offsetting/Insetting –Note it was not possible to estimate the potential of renewable energy 
supply for leased building as there is no breakdown of energy or emissions sources. 
The remaining emissions could be addressed using other insetting activities.£ Capital costtCO2e saved
£12.1 mProcurement
Based on all suppliers setting and achieving a SBT over 10 years. This does not include savings 
from a Sustainable Procurement Policy in order to avoid double counting. It is assumed the 
policy would advocate for the inclusion of carbon reduction targets already being addressed 
through an SBT . This is separately covered because it requires significant and challenging 
reductions from suppliers to achieve their SBT . 05AppendicesAPPENDICESAppendix Page Number
Appendix 1 –Definitions 113
Appendix 2 –SBTi Method 114
Appendix 3 –Tyndall Carbon Budget 115
Appendix 4 –Action Planning -Prioritisation 116
Appendix 5 –Action Planning -Assumptions & Methodologies 117-126
Appendix 6 –Stakeholder Consultation Summaries 127-131
Appendix 7 –Summary of Measures -Assumptions 132113 Horsham District Council | AppendicesAPPENDIX 1 -DEFINITIONS
•Carbon Budget: The allowed cumulative total of emissions over a period 
of years which ensures temperature change remains below dangerous 
levels. Defined by The Tyndall Centre for Climate Change Research. .
•Co-benefit: The positive effects that a policy or measure aimed at one 
objective might have on other objectives.
•Ecosystem services: These refer to the benefits that ‘flow’ from natural 
capital (such as fertility from soils, or fuel and fibre from forests). 
•GHG: Greenhouse Gases.
•Green Infrastructure : This refers to the network of multi -functional 
green (and blue) space and other features, both urban and rural, which 
can deliver quality of life and environmental benefits for communities. It 
includes everything from nature reserves, woodlands and hedgerows to 
farmland, roadside verges, and green roofs. 
•Insetting : A similar principle to offsetting, however the carbon saving 
occurs within an organisation’s supply chain or local authority region.
•Nature -based solutions : These employ natural phenomena to help 
address problems such as climate change mitigation and adaptation. In terms of climate mitigation (as is the subject of this report), they focus 
on carbon sequestration. Examples include tree and hedgerow planting 
and restoration of ecosystems including wetlands, peatland, grasslands, 
pasture, and soils. Nature -based solutions are championed in the UK 
Government’s draft Environment Bill.  
•Natural Capital: This refers to the ‘stocks’ of renewable and non -
renewable natural resources available to society. It refers to nature in 
the context of the five capitals model in economics (i.e. financial, 
manufactured, social, human and natural capital). It is associated with 
monetary or other valuation and accounting techniques. Examples 
include soil, water, and forests. 
•Residual emissions : The estimated emissions remaining or left -over after 
reductions have been applied.
•SCATTER : Setting City Area Targets and Trajectories for Emissions 
Reduction. This is the tool used in the report to look at district -wide 
emissions and future emission pathways.
•Sequestration: The uptake of carbon -containing substances, in particular 
carbon dioxide from the atmosphere.
1 –IPCC Glossary definitions 114 Horsham District Council | AppendicesAPPENDIX 2 –SBTI 
METHOD
Methodology taken from the Foundations of science based target setting The approach taken to allocate emissions pathways by the SBTiconsists of 
three main elements: a greenhouse gas budget, emissions scenarios and a 
way of allocating the budget.
•Emissions scenarios –The first stage of the process involves 
determining a set of potential emissions scenarios that are “plausible, 
responsible, objective, and consistent and that are aligned with a 
specific temperature goals (1.5˚C or well below 2˚C of global 
warming)”.  The scenarios are taken from the Integrated Assessment 
Modelling Consortium and the International Energy Agency. They are 
taken from over 400 peer -reviewed emissions pathways from the IPCC 
Special Report on 1.5˚C of warming. 
•GHG budget -The budget is secondary to the emissions scenarios, 
which provide additional information such as reduction rates over time. 
•Allocation approach -This is then used to translate the emission 
scenario and GHG budget into requirements which allow organisations 
to align their emissions with the pathway. This can either take a 
convergence or contraction approach. The convergence method is 
applied to companies within a sector to reduce to an emissions 
intensity that is the same across the sector.115 Horsham District Council | AppendicesAPPENDIX 3: DERIVING 
THE CARBON BUDGETGlobal “well below” 2 °C emissions budget1
Global energy -only emissions budgetGlobal LULUCF2& 
cement processing 
emissions
Rest of the world energy -only emissions 
budget (c. 99.4%)UK emissions budget (c. 
0.6%)
UK 
aviation 
& 
shipping3UK energy -
only budget
Horsham 
energy -
only 
budgetHorsham 
LULUCF 
budgetBars/boxes in the diagram are 
not to sized scale of budgets 
1 -Budget derived from IPCC AR5 synthesis report and represents a 66 -100% probability of global 
warming not exceeding 2 °C (“well below”). Due to the inertia in our energy systems and the 
amount of carbon we have already emitted, the Paris 1.5 °C  commitment is now only likely to be 
viable if negative emissions technologies (NETs) prove to be successful at a global scale. If the 
13.5% emissions reduction rates for Horsham are achieved and NETs are deployed at the scales 
assumed in the global models, then the targets adopted may be considered as a 1.5 °C compatible. 
This also expressly assumes that other carbon cycle feedbacks, such as methane released due to 
melting permafrost etc., do not occur, and that an overshoot of 1.5 °C does not result in increased 
feedbacks that further accelerate warming at lower budgets than the IPCC budgets currently 
estimate.  
2 -Land Use, Land Use Change & Forestry 
3 -UK Aviation & Shipping is accounted for at the national level. If emissions due to aviation and 
shipping increases, then a smaller proportion of the UK -wide budget is available for the energy -
only budget and vice versa. Horsham ’s Budget
The carbon budget (4.5 million tCO2for the period 2020 -2100) sets out a 
finite emissions limit that the should not be exceeded in order that Lewes 
remains in line with the Paris Agreement. The budget itself is derived from a 
‘scaling -down’ approach –a full methodology is available to view in the full 
print version of the Tyndall Centre’s research.   
The Tyndall Centre for Climate Change Research have based this budget on a 
2°C global average temperature rise, on the basis that: 
1.The Paris Agreement commits us to limiting warming to this level.  
2.Global modelling for both 1.5 °C and 2 °C assume planetary scale negative 
emissions. 
Negative Emissions Technologies (NETs)
NETs remain a highly speculative and uncertain development and are leaned 
upon heavily in IPCC models. Large -scale NETs are not likely to be viable 
within the boundary of Horsham due to the profile of emissions. 
If research, development and demonstration of NETs shows that they may 
work at scale, and then they are rolled out globally at unprecedented rates, 
1.5°C may theoretically be achievable. However this is only made possible if 
rapid, deep 2 °C mitigation begins now and additional feedbacks do not occur . 116 Horsham District Council | AppendicesAPPENDIX 4: PRIORITISATION -RESEARCH METHOD
How to structure the action plan, and which sectors to focus on:
The actions discussed in the report are grouped by “Sector”, covering Transportation & Fleet, Property, 
Contracts, and Parks & Countryside. Our footprint review confirmed that these sectors constitute the vast 
majority of HDC’s emissions, and these categories are in line with relevant subject matter leaders and 
associated organisational structures inside HDC. Initial conversations with these stakeholders formed the 
foundation for the research that followed, and it became apparent that structuring the report in this way 
would improve uptake within HDC. Sectors included in footprint
Scope 1 Transportation & Fleet; Property
Scope 2 Property
Scope 3 Procurement & Contracts; PropertyThere are numerous of potential carbon reduction actions available to your organisation. When building the Action Plan, we ha ve applied our judgement at 
several stages to prioritise the opportunities most suitable for your organisation. We have considered: 
Which options are worthy of research and discussion in this report:
In producing the action plan, we have focussed our research on those actions 
expected to have the highest impact, and which will fit best with HDC’s 
existing assets and organisational structures. In building out our understanding 
of the latter, stakeholder engagement was essential. We have developed our 
understanding of key priorities, opportunities and barriers around each action 
within HDC:
1.Prior to the Stakeholder Workshop, we reviewed which actions to discuss 
based on our initial stakeholder conversations and HDC’s organisational 
priorities
2.We used the Stakeholder Workshop to gain consensus views on the ease of 
implementation and anticipated impact of each potential action using a 
qualitative ranking axis. We also polled attendees to test preferences 
across sectors.
3.After the session, we received further views the suitability of each option. 
Collating these findings, we prioritised actions for inclusion in the action plan.
A summary of key themes can be found at the beginning of each sector.0 2 4 6 8Data management/optimisationOtherSustainable procurement policiesSustainable land managementGreen vehicles and fleet managementMore sustainable buildingsEnergy Efficiency & Green EnergyWhich of the following action areas do you think 
offers the biggest opportunity for Horsham District 
Council to achieve “Net -Zero”?117 Document Name | Section NameAPPENDIX 5
ACTION 
PLANNING
ASSUMPTIONS & 
METHDOLOGIES118 Horsham District Council | AppendicesAPPENDIX 5 -ACTION PLANNING METHODOLOGIES
TRANSPORTATION & FLEET
Actions Estimated Cost Cost Calculation -Method & Assumptions Carbon Saving Carbon Saving Calculation -Method & 
Assumptions
Priority 1: Demand Reduction (1/2)
Route 
Optimisation for 
Refuse 
Collection 
Vehicles (RCVs)Dependent on chosen 
software/technology -offset by 
fuel savingsWest Suffolk case study reports savings of £300,000 
annually95tCO 2e Applies a similar general method to that used in Ashden by 
scaling the reductions achieved elsewhere. Based on West 
Suffolk council route optimisation which saved 115 tCO2 
through mapping and geolocation technology. This example 
is from 2010/11 so some further advancements in 
technology may be available.
Eco-training for 
driversThe Energy Saving Trust 
currently offer subsidised driver 
training programmes.
Approximately £2,000. Applies a similar general method to that used in 
Ashden by scaling the cost from other case studies 
where this approach has been implemented. Based 
on Oxford City Council a total investment of £5,000, 
the scheme had a simple payback of 4 weeks to train 
all 330 registered drivers at the council. There is no 
data available n the number of registered drivers at 
HDC therefore it has been scaled by the total 
number of staff. OXCC have approximately 1,300 
staff.53 tCO 2e Applies a similar general method to that used in Ashden by 
scaling known reductions achieved elsewhere. Oxford City 
Council saved 150tCO2e in the first year for driver training. 
They have approximately 1,300 staff therefore the savings 
have been scaled to the number of Horsham staff
Working from 
Home 
assessmentAdditional staff resource for 2 -3 
month projectThis would require additional staff time to conduct a 
survey, process data and analyse commuting habits.126 tCO 2e (not including 
additional costs for 
home heating)Assume commuting journeys are reduced by 40% (based on 
HDC own estimation of long term homeworking trends from 
email correspondence 03.07.2020)119 Horsham District Council | AppendicesAPPENDIX 5 -ACTION PLANNING METHODOLOGIES
TRANSPORTATION & FLEET
Actions Estimated Cost Cost Calculation -Method & Assumptions Carbon Saving Carbon Saving Calculation -Method & 
Assumptions
Priority 1: Demand Reduction (2/2)
Greener 
commuting No cost to council unless the 
invest in further 
schemes/facilities.
E.g. Cycle Parking: Bike stands: 
£30-£40
Covered parking: £1,800 plus 
stands
Lockers: £620+ per lockerDependent on the need to provide facilities etc. 
example of cycle parking facilities from Transport for 
London Workplace Cycle Parking GuideIncreasing those who 
walk and cycle to 25% 
saves 21 tCO 2e Based on altering the % of journeys by different modes -
after the reduction in commuting journeys from work from 
home. Car journeys now reduced to 51%
Reducing overall 
business travel 
and encouraging 
active travel 
modes for 
necessary 
business travelAs above As above 15 tCO 2e Applying a similar percentage reduction based on home 
working of 40% and assuming 25% of Business travel will be 
by bike or walking instead of car.120 Horsham District Council | AppendicesAPPENDIX 5 -ACTION PLANNING METHODOLOGIES
TRANSPORTATION & FLEET
Actions Estimated Cost Cost Calculation -Method & Assumptions Carbon 
SavingCarbon Saving Calculation -
Method & Assumptions
Priority 2: Alternative Fuels
Increase Electric 
Vehicle (EV) 
charging 
infrastructure50kW charging point: £17,000 -£33,000.
Note this does not include an estimate for savings or 
income received from renewable energy generation.CNEX low emission van guide –50 kW charging point can 
charge an electric van in <1 hour. 
No available estimates on number of charge points needed or 
current capacity at the council.N/A-Enabling 
ActionN/A-Enabling Action
Trial low carbon 
Light Goods 
Vehicles (LGVs)An electric RCV costs approximately £201,580 more 
than a diesel RCV (£5,845,820 for whole fleet). 
However, the lower running costs of an electric RCV 
mean that the total cost of ownership is £29,608 
greater for an electric RCV (£858,632 for whole 
fleet)..Based on the headline results of a cost -benefit analysis, 
comparing an electric RCV and a diesel RCV. Full method 
available in the report . Based on switching all 29 council 
RCVs.1,110 tCO 2e Based on an 87% reduction projected 
if all local authority RCVs were 
switched to electric (330 ktCO2 to 40 
ktCO2e). Based on switching all 29 
RCVs to electric after route 
optimisation
Switch to EV 
cars/vansOne estimate suggests a cost of £150,000 per annum
However, other sources indicate a lower whole life 
costing for EVs e.g. Comparing an EV and Internal 
Combustion Engine (ICE) pool car over 5 years saves 
around £3,300 (total saving of £36,000 for whole 
fleet). Comparing an EV and ICE van over 3 years 
saves around £3,100 (total saving of £58,900 for 
whole fleet).
The Energy Saving Trust offer a free Ultra -Low 
Emissions Vehicle reviewBased on switching 30 cars, GM vehicles and vans.
First estimate comes from Ashden which estimates an 
additional £5k per annum for each electric vehicle. 
The second estimate comes from the Energy Savings Trust's 
comparison of EV and ICE pool cars/vans.107 tCO 2e 
(100% switch 
powered by 
grid)
164 tCO 2e 
(100% powered 
by renewable 
generation)Ashden -average saving if all vehicles 
switched to EV is 66%, savings will 
increase as the grid decarbonises. 
If EVs are supplied by renewables 
generated on site then 100% of 
emissions from vehicles can be 
saved.
Vehicles assumed to switch are Cars, 
Grounds maintenance vehicles and 
vans121 Horsham District Council | AppendicesAPPENDIX 5 -ACTION PLANNING METHODOLOGIES
PROPERTY
Actions Estimated Cost Cost Calculation -Method & 
AssumptionsCarbon Saving Carbon Saving Calculation -Method & 
Assumptions
Priority 1: Behaviour Change
Better report and 
feedback on energy 
consumptionWithin existing staff resources. Included as part of the role and communications 
associated with the annual footprint review.N/A-Enabling 
ActionN/A-Enabling Action
Mandate 
consumption data 
from tenantsWithin existing staff resources. Incorporated into the additional staff resource 
required for providing guidance to tenantsN/A-Enabling 
ActionN/A-Enabling Action
Raise staff 
awareness~£5,000 for education programme Example staff education programme -carbon 
literacy training pricing index. £10 per applicant 
certification and £500 -£750 for criteria checking 
if a new course were to be designed but toolkit 
for Local Authorities available. 117 tCO 2e Based on savings made by Islington borough council. Scaled 
by the size of the boroughs population. Horsham is 59% of 
the size of Islington, which has been applied to savings 
achieved by Islington. Note that the Islington case study 
does include schools and is a more urban authority which we 
recognise may not apply to Horsham
Guidance for 
tenantsAdditional staff resource -0.5 FTE Based on Ashden estimations for staff time 
required to drive non -owned property 
improvements. 20 tCO 2e Ashden -12% of energy is used in lighting and appliances. 
Ashden estimate 10% savings possible through improving 
energy efficiency of appliances.
Decommission 
buildingsAgency & transaction fees would be 
incurred as part of the sale. 
Cost savings will be achieved through 
avoidance of energy bills and business 
rate charges from new tenants. 137 tCO 2e (average 
office building)Based on the average emissions of buildings that fall under 
the category 'offices'. However, the council may wish to 
decommission their highest emitting buildings. This does not 
factor in the replacement of buildings or an estimation of 
the emissions from home working.122 Horsham District Council | AppendicesAPPENDIX 5 -ACTION PLANNING METHODOLOGIES
PROPERTY
Actions Estimated Cost Cost Calculation -Method & Assumptions Carbon Saving Carbon Saving Calculation -Method & 
Assumptions
Priority 2: Energy Efficiency (1/2)
Retrofit owned buildingsInvestment grade audits 
can be commissioned per 
building ranging £2,000 -
£5,000.
Retrofitting to 
Energiesprong standard 
for residential properties 
-£4.9m
Non -domestic buildings -
£7.7mBased on Anthesis' industry experiences.
Residential: Ashden Energiesprong currently costs  £75k 
per dwelling but is forecast to come down to £35k.  
Assuming all 65 residential properties are retrofit, some 
residential properties e.g. Drill Hall would be included 
under non -domestic as the main use of the building sits 
within that category.
Non -domestic buildings : 
This is only indicative and all buildings would require 
investment grade audits because of their diverse, 
complex and unknown current efficiency status. Such 
audits may result in an estimate that is materially 
different .
Method is based on HDC judgement informed by 
historic building audit carried out for Drill Hall which 
will be further refined during Investment Grade Audits. 
Properties with emissions greater than this building 
have been assumed to cost the same (£750,000). Those 
below have been scaled based on the proportion of 
emissions. We recognise emissions may not reflect the 
scale of retrofit required, cost is dependent on the size, 
complexity, age, operations, conditions of the existing 
building stock and its assets. I t is recommended that 
HDC carry out audits across the entire stock. Energiesprong standard for 
residential properties 145 tCO2e
Non-domestic building retrofit 
332 tCO2e (Ashden) to 1,983 
tCO2e (zero carbon buildings)
Total: 497 -2,128 tCO2e. Residential -We recognise that temporary 
accommodation may not have the same structure 
ad size as domestic property but has been used due 
to similar use. Retrofitting to energieprong standard 
saves on average reduces emissions from homes by 
86% ( Ashden )
Non -domestic not including car parks and lighting 
or residential (1,959 tCO 2)-67% of energy is used 
for space heating and based on carbon trust 
estimates good controls can save 15 -35% of heating 
costs. This approach takes the middle value of 25% 
savings. Dependent on the ambition of retrofit this 
is based on cutting the energy used for heating by 
25%. (30.9 tCO 2is SC3 and 297.9 tCO 2is SC1&2; 
Ashden ). 
An estimate of zero carbon property is included to 
show retrofitting to the highest standards 
(Towards Net Zero Carbon: Achieving greater 
carbon reductions on site. The role of carbon 
pricing.)
These savings include retrofitting of Parkside 
however we recognise the leasing structure differs 
from other properties in Scope 1 and 2. Retrofit 
would reduce the footprint of HDC but the 
ownership of the cost would be have to be defined.123 Horsham District Council | AppendicesAPPENDIX 5 -ACTION PLANNING METHODOLOGIES
PROPERTY
Actions Estimated Cost Cost Calculation -Method & 
AssumptionsCarbon Saving Carbon Saving Calculation -Method & Assumptions
Priority 2: Energy Efficiency (2/2)
Energy saving 
technologiesMinimal Ashden -More energy efficient 
appliances do not necessarily cost more 
and any additional cot would be paid 
back trough energy savings.26 tCO 2e Ashden -12% of energy is used in lighting and appliances. Ashden 
estimate 10% savings possible through improving energy efficiency 
of appliances. But savings could be higher e.g. 50% for LCD screens 
and LEDs.
Electricity consumption (not including car parks and public lighting 
-covered below) + gas consumption (23.4 is scope 1 and 2 but 
total includes scope 3)
Energy saving 
technologies~£350,000 to replace 1,000 
streetlightsAshden -based on cost of £4m to 
Islington Council for the replacement of 
11,350 street lights to LEDs with CMS 
(Central Management System) control
but interest free Salix finance available 
for this with repayments funded 
through bill savings 120 kgCO 2e per 1000 
streetlightsAshden -based on Islington Council replacing 11,350 streetlights 
and saving 1,414 tCO2 per year. Scaled for 1000 street lights. There 
is no data available of the actual number of street lights or public 
lighting provided by the council in car parks etc, therefore 
estimates have been provided per 1000 lights replaced.
Retrofit properties let 
out when tenancies 
endInvestment grade audits can be 
commissioned per building 
ranging £2,000 -£5,000.
Dependent on the size, 
complexity, age, operations, 
conditions of the existing 
building stock and its assets. 
Estimate based on 1 HDC audit 
-£12.1 m Based on Anthesis' industry 
experiences. 
Method and assumptions as above for 
retrofitting operational stock.89 tCO 2e (Ashden
estimate of insulation 
improvements) to 1,590 
tCO 2e (zero carbon 
buildings)Assuming 1/3 of properties are able to be upgraded over a 10 year 
period. 
Ashden -67% of energy is used for space heating and based on 
carbon trust estimates good controls can save 15 -35% of heating 
costs. This approach takes the middle value of 25% savings. These 
assumptions are illustrative only and should not be relied upon. 
Dependent on the ambition of retrofit this is based on cutting the 
energy used for heating by 20%. 124 Horsham District Council | AppendicesAPPENDIX 5 -ACTION PLANNING METHODOLOGIES
PROPERTY
Actions Estimated Cost Cost Calculation -
Method & AssumptionsCarbon Saving Carbon Saving Calculation -Method & 
Assumptions
Priority 3: Behaviour Change
Increase 
renewable 
energy supplySwitching providers may require a fee.
Additional staff time for energy opportunities 
mapping
£800,000 for a 1MW heat pump
Current supply does not offer a significant saving 
on non -renewable energy bills, whereas self 
generation would. Ashden -Based on a 1MW 
heat pump generating 
4,380MWh. Heat pumps are 
cheaper than solar PV given 
RHI.1063 tCO 2e Based on the remaining electricity (not gas) 
demand in Scope 2 being supplied by quality 
renewable sources.
Savings so far calculated as 640 tCO 2e. Some of 
these reductions may be covered by grid 
decarbonisation. 65% of emissions from energy 
use are from electricity so the saving is split 
proportionally with gas. Includes scope 3 savings.
Priority 4: New Property
High green 
building 
standards for 
new propertiesNew buildings to LEED Gold standard estimated to 
be c. 10% additional on capital costs although 
operational cost savings should more than 
compensate this premium over the lifetime of the 
building.
The difference between a BREEAM ‘pass’ and an 
‘excellent’ rating for offices is shown to incur an 
increase in capital cost of 0.8%.
Building costs of Passivhaus for residential 
properties is approximately 7% higher.Based on estimates provided 
by LEED and BREEAM specific 
papers .
Passivhaus estimates from 
Ashden based on email 
correspondence. Note that 
these costs are likely to 
decrease overtime.
No data available for 
projected council growth so 
results are given per property 
rather than attempting to 
estimating future property 
demand.The average CO 2saving for a 
BREEAM assessed building is 
22% and a BREEAM Excellent 
rated building is expected to 
reduce carbon emissions by 
33%. 
1360 kgCO 2/year saving for an 
average Passivhaus residential 
property. This equates to 68 
tCO 2e over the lifetime of a 
property (c.50 years).Based on a cost and carbon saving study into 
BREEAM rated properties.
For an average sized residential property, being 
built to Passivhaus standard would save 
approximately 1360 kgCO 2/year. (20 kg/m2for 
68m2house).125 Horsham District Council | AppendicesAPPENDIX 5 -ACTION PLANNING METHODOLOGIES
PROCUREMENT
Actions Estimated Cost Cost Calculation -Method & 
AssumptionsCarbon Saving Carbon Saving Calculation -Method & 
Assumptions
Sustainable Procurement
Sustainable procurement 
policyAdditional staff time –
0.5 FTE (£45,000)Ashden -Method assumes 2.5 days 
a week for an officer to update 
procurement policies, engage with 
suppliers and review tenders.3,340 tCO 2e per year Ashden -On average, every £1m of expenditure by local 
authorities in London resulted in 337 tonnes of GHG 
emissions, measured in carbon dioxide equivalent (CO2e), 
ranging from 167 tCO2e to 674 tCO2e/£ mn. For average 
council, to achieve levels of the best would mean a saving 
of 170tCO2e per £1m spend .  Based on the data from the 
Carbon Trust report, which we acknowledge may not be 
fully accurate, the annual procurement spend is 
£20,235,071. Therefore savings would be approximately 
3,340 tCO2e
Supplier requirementsNo direct cost to council, cost on 
supplier for Environment strategy or 
SBT process. 
SBTi target validation: The target 
validation service costs USD 4950 (+ 
applicable VAT), which includes up 
to two target assessments 
(companies can choose between 
one preliminary and one official, or 
two official validations).
Other target methods may also be 
available, for example, see the City 
of Manchester approach.  SBTi website -FAQs on how much 
do companies have to pay -The 
target validation service costs USD 
4950 (+ applicable VAT), which 
includes up to two target 
assessments (companies can choose 
between one preliminary and one 
official, or two official validations).524 tCO 2e reduction 
from base year every 
year. After 5 years 
2,618.SBTi methodology -If all suppliers were to adopt a SBT in 
line with 1.5 C of warming, this means a 4.2% reduction in 
emissions from the base year per year over 5 years would 
be equal to 21% reduction126 Horsham District Council | AppendicesAPPENDIX 5 -ACTION PLANNING METHODOLOGIES
PARKS & COUNTRYSIDE
Actions Estimated Cost Cost Calculation -Method & 
AssumptionsCarbon Saving Carbon Saving Calculation -Method & 
Assumptions
Protect and Enhance Natural Capital Sequestration
Protect current natural 
capital stockWithin existing resources. Costs are assumed to be within existing 
resources as it is already the responsibility of 
the council to manage their stock.TBD by mapping exercise 
(covered under Priority 1)This would be a key output of the sequestration mapping 
exercise covered under priority 1 of Parks and Countryside 
and highlights the need to complete this enabling action.
Heathland restorationEstimates on present 
value per ha <£10,000 
over 50 years.Based on Natural Capital Restoration Review 
report -Upper: £7,111 over 50 years
Lower: £900 over 11 years + one -off cost of 
£290 forDependent on 
management and 
restoration option and the 
data on this habitat shows 
huge variations Estimates from Carbon storage by habitat: Review of the 
evidence of the impacts of management decisions and 
condition of carbon stores and sources. Table 2 Carbon 
consequences of some management options in heathlands
Increase natural capital 
stock£205,000 (based on £41 
for 30 trees).
Woodland Trust, 2019. Large scale planting. Planting 148,000 trees or 
planting on 100 ha of land 
would save approximately 
355 tCO 2 (approximate 
offsetting requirement)Tree are only used for an example, the council should still 
consider the most appropriate natural capital. This does not 
include any estimate of the existing sequestration. 
Estimate based on approximate cumulative carbon 
sequestration rates for 148,000 trees calculated using the 
WCC Carbon Calculation Spreadsheet (2019). The rate is 
based on a scenario that assumes the following:
-Tree species: sycamore, ash, birch (mix or pure species)
-Planted on 100 ha, with spacing 2.5m
-Yield class: 8 (according to UK Forestry Commission’s 
‘Carbon Lookup Tables’)
-No plans to thin or clear -fell at any time.
This assumes that 14,800 trees are planted every year up 
until 2030, where sequestration continues as trees mature. 
28% large trees, 51% medium and 21% small.127 Document Name | Section NameAPPENDIX 6
STAKEHOLDER 
CONSULTATION 
SUMMARIESDuring stakeholder engagement sessions, we provided attendees with a view of key Action 
Planning opportunities identified early in the research process. Stakeholders were invited to 
comment on comment on the actions, indicating key enablers, barriers, and other factors 
impacting the potential implementation of the action within HDC. Opportunities were also 
qualitatively ranked on Axis of anticipated Impact vs. Ease of Implementation. 
Below we provide a summary views per sector. Note: actions do not fully represent those 
which appear in the final document as this was early in the consultation process. 128 Horsham District Council | AppendicesStakeholder Workshop feedback 
Easiest to Implement Hardest to ImplementHighest Impact
Lowest ImpactAPPENDIX 6
TRANSPORTATION & FLEET –EASE VS EFFECT
•Working from home mentioned by 
every group as something that had 
worked well so far and should be 
explored further.
•Cost was cited as a key barrier in 
switching to alternative fuels, 
particularly in regards to HGVs which 
will require significant investment
•Some concerns over infrastructure 
available for alternative fuelsGreener 
Commuting
Working from 
Home 
AssessmentEco-Training for 
DriversLow Carbon 
LGV
Switch to 
Electric 
Vehicles
Route 
Optimisation129 Horsham District Council | AppendicesStakeholder Workshop feedback 
Easiest to Implement Hardest to ImplementHighest Impact
Lowest ImpactAPPENDIX 6
PROPERTY –EASE VS EFFECT
•New properties built to high green standards 
–there has been work to improve this but 
there is an additional cost.
•Owned and Occupied buildings –could target 
specific buildings, consider decommissioning 
buildings if reducing office space. Potential 
for energy efficiency technologies as there 
will is a quantifiable cost saving. Generating 
renewable energy must consider maintenance 
and dedicated resource 
•Leased out –Some existing building 
regulations in place (e.g. MEES) but need to 
consider what can be done beyond this. 
Opportunities for guidance, knowledge 
sharing and economies of scale. But difficult 
to make an investment case for energy 
efficiency improvementsGreen Building 
StandardsRenewable 
Energy SupplyRetrofit: Owned 
& Leased
Energy Saving 
TechRetrofit: Owned 
& Operated
Guidance for 
TenantsRetrofit: Leased 
& Operated130 Horsham District Council | AppendicesStakeholder Workshop feedback 
Easiest to Implement Hardest to ImplementHighest Impact
Lowest ImpactAPPENDIX 6
PROCUREMENT –EASE VS EFFECT
•General consensus that this is a good 
opportunity and easy to implement.
•Demand for training of officers to 
evaluate sustainable criteria and 
understand how best to manage 
contracts.
•Some concerns that changes in policy 
will impact cost. Other barriers 
suggested include supporting smaller 
suppliers, long term contracts and 
legal support if contracts are broken.Supplier 
RequirementsWeighting of 
Social Value
Better Supplier 
DataEffective 
Contract 
ManagementSustainable 
Procurement 
Policy131 Horsham District Council | AppendicesStakeholder Workshop feedback 
Easiest to Implement Hardest to ImplementHighest Impact
Lowest ImpactAPPENDIX 6
PARKS AND COUNTRYSIDE –EASE VS EFFECT
•Identified as an area that meets 
multiple targets in the corporate plan 
and presents significant opportunity to 
link to the ecological emergency and 
Wilder Horsham.
•Starting point needs to be mapping and 
carbon assessment of land 
•Protecting current stock is important 
but difficult to enforce and no 
mechanism in place to demonstrate 
payback
•Land acquisition through planning 
system or buying vacant land was 
agreed to be an expensive approach 
and highlights the need for a way to 
assess carbon value  Heathland 
RestorationIntegration with 
Wilder HorshamProtect natural 
capitalLand acquisition
Mapping 
sequestration 
opportunities132 Horsham District Council |Action PlanningAPPENDIX 7
SUMMARY OF MEASURES -ASSUMPTIONS
In our conclusion to the Action Plan, we draw together our 
recommendations to illustrate the aggregated impact of each 
action plan opportunity. In addition to those relayed in Appendix 
5, this further assumptions: 
•Several of the estimates are based on third party proxies and 
are inherently limited in accuracy.
•HDC should look to perform more robust estimates of figures 
included and be sure to understand the assumptions made and 
limitations therein. The estimates are prudent, and not 
intended to constrain ambition and the council should look to 
go beyond the targets set. 
•Supply and demand side interventions should not typically be 
added together (to avoid the risk of double counting); however 
have been presented on the same chart to illustrate the need to 
consider energy supply projects in the wider district as one way 
of compensating for any unabated Directly Controlled emissions.
133Disclaimer
Anthesis (UK) Limited hasprepared thisreport forthesoleuseoftheclient (Horsham District Council) andfortheintended purposes asstated intheagreement between Anthesis andtheclient
under which thisreport wascompleted .Anthesis hasexercised dueandcustomary care inpreparing thisreport buthasnot, save asspecifically stated, independently verified information
provided byothers .Noother warranty, express orimplied, ismade inrelation tothecontents ofthisreport .Theuseofthisreport, orreliance onitscontent, byunauthorised third parties
without written permission from Anthesis shall beattheir ownrisk,andAnthesis accepts noduty ofcare tosuch third parties .Anyrecommendations, opinions orfindings stated inthisreport are
based onfacts andcircumstances asthey existed atthetime thereport wasprepared .Anychanges insuch facts andcircumstances may adversely affect therecommendations, opinions or
findings contained inthisreport .