 
1 
 
 
 
1 - Recommendation/s  
1. Support and endorse the development and implementation of a new corporate 
Climate Change Programme to enable the authority to transition into a carbon 
neutral organisation by 2030.  
 
2. Support and endorse the recruitment of a corporate Climate Change 
Programme Manager (new post) to lead on development and delivery .  
 
3. Support and endorse the establishment of a Climate Change Working Group 
(with political representation) – an advisory, non -decision -making group to 
make recommendations and requests.  
 
4. Regional governance and structures – TBC. 
 
 
 
2 – Link to Council Plan / Other Corporate Priorities  
 
The proposed corporate C limate Change Programme would respond directly to one of 
the Council's well -being objectives set out in the Council's Plan 2017 -22 of working with 
our communities to  order to ensure that they are able to cope effectively with change and 
development while protecting our natural environment. It will also add value to one area 
where progress is being made to becom e more efficient in terms o f energy consumption 
and reducing carbon emissions.  
  
ISLE OF ANGLESEY COUNTY COUNCIL  
Scrutiny Report Template  
 
Committee:  Partnership and Regeneration  Scrutiny Committee  
Date:  11 March , 2021  
Subject:  Enabling the Isle of Anglesey County Council to transition into 
a carbon neutral organisation by 2030 - delivering a new 
corporate Climate Change Programme.  
 
Purpose of Report:  To give the Partnership and Regeneration  Scrutiny 
Committee an opportunity to consider, respond and influence 
the proposed way forward for the authority to build on 
progress and achievements to date to transition into being a 
carbon neutral organisation by 2030.  
Scrutiny Chair:  Councillor Gwilym O Jones  
Portfolio Holder(s):  Councillor Richard Dew (Planning and Public Protection 
Portfolio Holder)  
Head of Service:  Dylan Williams, Deputy Chief Executive  
 
Report Author:  
Email:  Dylan Williams, Deputy Chief Executive  
 
Local Members:  Relevant to all elected Members   
2 
 
It would also contribute towards meeting one of the Council's aspirations conveyed 
through the Delivery Document 2020 -20 22 by ‘support and work towards a Carbon 
Neutral Public Sector by 2030 ’. The actions resognised to date include:  
 
 Provid ing leadership to develop practices and deliver interventions to reduce our 
Carbon footprint as a corporation and Island.  
 Investigate and initiate the provision of electric vehicle charging points across the 
Island.  
 Increase the number of Council fleet cars / vehicles to be electric or LP  
 Continue and our intention to ensure that 70% of al l household waste is re -cycled  
 Develop walking and cy cling routes in line with the Welsh Local Travel Act.  
 
 
 
 
 
3 – Guiding Principles for Scrutiny  Members  
To assist Members when scrutinising the topic: -  
 
3.1 Impact the matter has on individuals and communities [focus on customer/citizen]  
 
3.2 A look at the efficiency & effectiveness of any proposed change – both financially and 
in terms of quality  [focus on value] 
 
3.3 A look at any risks  [focus on  risk]  
 
3.4 Scrutiny taking a performance monitoring or quality assura nce role  [focus on 
performance & quality]  
 
3.5 Looking at plans and proposals from a perspective of : 
 Long term  
 Prevention  
 Integration  
 Collaboration  
 Involvement  
 [focus on wellbeing]  
 
 
4 - Key S crutiny Questions  
a) Are you confident that what is being offered will contribute towards ensuring that the 
Council addresses  key climate change legislation and policies?  
 
 b)   Following the climate emergency statement, what is the Committee’s opinion on the 
4 priority areas for local authorities?  
c)    To what extent will a further investment be needed in order to ensure that we 
become a carbon neutral organisation by 2030, and what further resources will be 
required?  
d) What good practices  have developed as a result of the pandemic with will require 
atten tion and consideration when planning for the recovery phase?  
  
3 
 
 
5 – Background /  Context  
1.0 Introduction  
 
1.1 The Isle of Anglesey County Council (“the authority”), unanimously declared a 
climate emergency at Full Council on the 8th September 2020, committing the 
authority to become carbon neutral by 2030.  
 
1.2 The scale of the transformational change needed, and how this can be achieved 
(through a combination of corporate and Service level activity, improved awareness, 
and behavioural change) needs to be better understood.  
 
1.3 Several National and regional Strategies have since been drafted to respond to the 
challenges to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. Whilst the authority is fully 
committed to continued engagement and c ollaboration with all partners, at all levels, 
there is also a recognition that all delivery is local. The authority is committed to 
providing local leadership on the Island, and to act corporately to deliver decisive 
changes to enable the effective transi tion into being a carbon neutral organisation. 
Whilst some decisions and actions are within the authority’s control, others will need 
assistance and additional resources form the Welsh Government and UK 
Government to co -ordinate, develop, and deliver. Desp ite the challenges and 
ongoing uncertainties, the opportunity to make lasting positive impacts and change 
needs to be grasped.  
 
2.0 Context  
 
2.1 Climate change is the globally defining challenge of our time. It is a matter that 
transcends political and soc ial boundaries and it is often the most vulnerable 
members of communities who are impacted the most. Decarbonisation offers 
enormous opportunities to create a vibrant and socially -just economy. The key 
legislation and policies are summarised in Annex A . 
 
2.2 Together the UK Climate Change Act (2008), the Wellbeing of Future Generations 
(Wales) Act 2015 and the Environment Act (Wales) 2016 provide the legal 
framework for action on climate change and sustainable management of Wales’ 
natural resources, with ea ch underpinned by strategies and frameworks. Together 
they position Wales as a low carbon and environmentally sustainable economy, 
ready to adapt to the impacts of climate change and to mitigate the impacts o n 
biodiversity.  
 
The ambition for Wales includes a goal of a carbon neutral  public sector by 2030. 
To achieve that goal, Welsh Government advocate a ‘team Wales’ approach with 
strong leadership, collaboration and political engagement across national and local 
government, and a consistent and robust approach.  
 
2.3 Local government is recognised as being fundamental to delivering decarbonisation, 
particularly in providing local leadership and championing ambitious sustainable 
solutions and behavioural  change. There are already considerable external funding 
(grants and loans) opportunities to progress climate change and decarbonisation 
plans and programmes, with an increase likely over coming years. A clear plan, 
corporate approach, a comprehensive base line, robust monitoring arrangements, 
dedicated additional capacity, and defined roles and responsibilities will be essential 
to try and take full advantage and reinforce current efforts to transition into becoming 
carbon neutral by 2030.  
  
4 
 
2.4 Local govern ment across Wales also recognise that working together to share 
expertise, evidence and solutions will help ensure investment, as well as effective 
strategy and policy to develop and deliver the quickest and most sustainable ‘route -
map’ to achieving legal obligations and ambitions to be carbon neutral by 2030.  
 
3.0 Local Government Decarbonisation Strategy Panel  
 
3.1 The Local Government Decarbonisation Strategy Panel (DSP) has been set up to 
help lead, support, encourage and give a strategic overview.   
 
3.2 The establishment of the Panel was agreed by the Partnership Council for Wales in 
June 2020, with representation by local authority chief executives, WLGA, other 
public sector organisations, Welsh Government and relevant advisors. It reports to 
the Par tnership Council who provides political direction and leadership for the work. 
North Wales local authorities are represented by the Chief Executive of Conwy 
County Borough Council.  
 
3.2.1  Each local authority is committed to:  
 
a) Understanding their carbon fo otprint, in line with guidance for public 
sector greenhouse emissions reporting  
b) Agreeing to a set of net zero commitments/pledges for COP26 (scheduled 
to be held in Glasgow in November 2021)  
c) Closely monitoring and reporting on their current and future carb on 
emissions  
d) Ensuring there is a robust, evidence -based net zero action plan in place, 
as a living document, by March 2021  
e) Working with the new Decarbonisation Strategy Panel  
 
The Panel and Welsh Government have recently prepared a route map for decarbonisation 
across the Welsh public sector which proposes the following broad priority areas for action:  
Buildings ; Mobility and Transport ; Land Use ; and Procurement .  
 
4.0 The Authority’s Carbon Footprint (Baseline)  
 
4.1 Understanding the carbon footprint of the authority is critical. A current and complete 
corporate baseline will ensure the approach is data driven to inform the prioritisation 
and progression of priority areas for intervention. Welsh Government guidance is  
believed to be imminent, whilst several other local authorities have already applied 
recognised methodologies within their organisations. This is the foundation to the 
whole corporate transition process. Once there is a baseline, it will be possible to 
introduce an effective corporate monitoring framework and dashboard. Targets can 
then be set with an agreed plan to deliver and becoming carbon neutral can be 
integrated into corporate planning and performance management arrangements at 
all levels.    
 
4.2 The Current Council Plan (2017 -2022) recognises “Work in partnership with our 
communities to ensure that they can cope effectively with change and developments 
whilst protecting our natural environment” , as one of three main priorities. This is to 
be progre ssed by “becoming more energy efficient and decrease our carbon 
emissions by concentrating on Leisure Centres, Schools and street lighting” . Despite 
the progress made to date, it is recognised that a more comprehensive and 
ambitious corporate approach will  need to be embedded into the next Council Plan, 
influenced and informed by the carbon footprint baseline.  
 
4.3 Annex C  outlines the current emissions which the authority monitors and measures, 
and some areas where greater activity is required.   
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.0 Action to Date (Baseline)  
 
5.1 In early 2020 (pre pandemic) an officer Task & Finish Group collaborated to prepare 
a baseline of existing action to combat climate change and decarbonise (directly and 
indirectly), with a view to informing a draft action  plan. This baseline (not definitive) 
is included in Annex D . Individual Services have been and continue to deliver 
positive changes. Despite this, the information collated is very descriptive in terms 
of activity, with no consistent approach to determine,  predict, or quantify the impact 
on reducing carbon emissions (against a corporate carbon footprint baseline). In 
addition, there are currently no formally agreed carbon reduction targets.  
 
5.2 Since this work commenced several traditional working practice s and ‘norms’ have 
been changed to maintain staff safety and service provision (e.g. virtual meetings 
have reduced overall work -related travel, working from home etc.). These must now 
be recognised as part of the baseline, nurtured and embedded when we ent er the 
post pandemic recovery period.   
 
 
6.0 Good Practice Review and Learning  
 
6.1 Research and learning has been undertaken by various officers to influence and 
inform the proposed corporate approach to transition into a carbon neutral 
organisation. Thi s is recognised as being the start of a new corporate journey with 
evolving expectations, policy, guidance, governance, and potential opportunities to 
secure additional delivery and implementation resources.  
 
6.2 In addition to participation at various WLG A and national forums, collaborating 
regionally (through largely informal structures), considering structures and 
approaches in other local authorities, reviewing relevant documents and 
publications, knowledge has been gained from attendance and participat ion at 
several recent virtual conferences and webinars:  
 
 LGA Climate Change 2020 (17th and 18th September 2020)  
 Climate Emergency Virtual Round Table (25th September 2020)  
 Low Carbon Connections Conference – Decarbonisation of Heat and 
Transport (2nd October 2020)  
 Locking in Positive Behaviours and the Benefits of Greene Recovery Webinar 
(2nd October 2020)  
 NW Wales Area Statements Webinars (NRW) (16th – 27th November 2020)  
 
6.3 This learning is summarised in Annex E , to assist and enable the authorit y to make 
an informed decision on the way forward.  
 
7.0 Corporate Co -ordination Capacity and Expertise  
  
6 
 
The authority does not currently have a dedicated corporate (or political lead) for 
climate change. Whilst some expertise exists on decarbonisation wit hin specific 
services, this is aligned with construction and building improvements. Other 
authorities have demonstrated their commitment to this critical thematic area by 
allocating dedicated resources. It is hoped, and anticipated, that over time the Wels h 
Government will recognise that activity to tackle climate change and decarbonisation 
must be reflected and incorporated into local authorities’ annual settlements. As time 
is of the essence, there is no alternative, but to allocate core funding to create  
dedicated capacity/ expertise to lead on progressing and co -ordinating the initial 
stages of development and delivery.  
 
This would be utilised to cover the employment costs of a senior corporate Climate 
Change Programme Manager for a two year period, with  an operational budget that 
would be utilised to prepare a carbon baseline, monitoring framework, dashboard, 
formulate acosted action plan, procure training etc. The dedicated capacity would 
also co -ordinate cross service activities, represent the authorit y in relevant regional 
and National groups and events, report on progress, influence Service activities, 
identify good practice, and ensure there is a sense of purpose, leadership and 
momentum.  
The capacity does not currently exist within the authority to  undertake these critical 
initial stages.  
 
8.0 Conclusion  
 
8.1 There is clear evidence that a plethora of activity is being progressed by different 
Services areas, responding positively to the need to reduce the authority’s carbon 
footprint. Despite this, there is currently no dedicated corporate capacity and 
expertis e to lead and inform the necessary whole organisation transformational 
change required.  
 
8.2       There is no corporate action plan, consistent approach, adopted targets, 
comprehensive baseline, or formal monitoring and reporting mechanisms. 
Expectations  are increasing, and the authority now needs to demonstrate the 
necessary internal and external local leadership.  
 
8.3       The commitments each local authority in Wales has made (through the Local 
Government Decarbonisation Strategy Panel) require a ded icated and sustained 
response. Time, effort and resources across the authority is already stretched, and 
without a dedicated programme approach, action plan, governance, and capacity/ 
expertise, the authority is unlikely to achieve its commitment to become  carbon 
neutral by 2030.  
 
8.4       Time is of the essence, with a need to take swift, meaningful and decisive action.  
 
 
6 – Equality Impact Assessment  [including impacts on the Welsh Language]  
 
Should the Executive Committee s upport and endorse the development and 
implementation of a new corporate Climate Change Programme to enable the authority to 
transition into a carbon neutral organisation by 2030 , an Equality Impact Assessment, 
and consideration of all the key themes/ impact areas will be embedded into the 
approach.  
  
7 
 
7 – Financial Implications  
The financial implications (costs and benefits) of delivering a new Climate Change 
Programme  cannot be estimated at this stage. Further work is required to prepare the 
Programme, and prioritise the activity areas. The need to pursue and secure external 
grant funding, collaborating with other orgnaisations is recognised.  
 
The initial financial im plications of the proposals set out above are centred upon the 
employment costs for the proposed new role, and immediate priority actions which need 
to be progressed (as outlined in paragraph 3.2.1).  
 
An initial budget of £400,000 - £600,000 is being soug ht). 
 
 
 
8 – Appendices:  
Annexes  
 
Annex A  
Summary of Key Climate Change Legislation and Policies  
 
Annex B  
Current Emissions Measured  
 
Annex C 
Action to Date (Baseline)  
 
Annex D  
Best Practice Suggestions to Tackle Climate Change and Recommendations for 
Consideration  
 
 
9 - Background papers  (please contact the author of the Report for any further 
information) : 
 
 
 
  
1 
 Annex A  
Summary of Key Climate Change Legislation and Policies  
 
 
 
 
 
Climate Change Act 2008  
The Act makes it the duty of the Secretary of State to ensure that the 
net UK carbon account for all six Kyoto greenhouse gases for the year 
2050 is 100% lower (net zero) than the 1990 baseline, Wales has a 
target of a 95% reduction with the aim of achieving net zero.  
Link: http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2008/27/contents   
 
 The Paris Agreement  
The first -ever universal, legally binding global climate deal is an 
agreement within the United Nations Framework Convention on 
Climate Change, dealing with greenhouse -gas-emissions mitigation, 
adaptation, and finance, signed in 2016.  
Link:https://unfccc.int/process -and-meetings/the -paris -agreement/the -paris -agreement  
 
Well -being of Future Generations Act 2015   
Requires public bodies in Wales to think about the long -
term impact of their  decisions, to work with people and  
communities  and to prevent persistent problems such as 
poverty, inequality  and climate change.  
Link: https://futuregenerations.wales/about -us/future -generations -act/  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Welsh Public sector decarbonisation  
The Welsh Government has an ambition to 
decarbonise the public sector. This was 
supported by the National Assembly for Wales 
in debate on decarbonisation in the Public 
Sector in June 2017.  
Decarbonisation is one of the Welsh 
Governments national priorities and public 
sector leadership is a key theme in the 
“prosperity for all: A low carbon Wales” plan of 
action.  
Link:  https://gov.wales/sites/default/files/publications/2019 -
04/decarbonisation -of-the-public -sector -call-for-evidence -
2017.pdf  
 
 
2 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Environment (Wales) Act 2016  
Introduced by the National Assembly for Wales and came in 
to force on 21 March 2016.  The act puts in p lace the 
necessary legislation to enable more sustainable planning 
and management of the natural resources of Wales.  
 
 
 
 
 
 IOACC Plan 2017 -2022  
The Council’s key ambition from the Plan is:  
“we will be working towards an Anglesey that is 
healthy, thriving and prosperous”  annd includes 
three main objectives:  
 See people realise their potential  
 Vulnerable people are safeguarded  
 Communities and the  environment are 
protected in times  of change  
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 Annex B 
Current Emissions Measured  
  
4 
 What is currently measured?  
 
Scope  Emissions  Owner  What do we measure, when and how?  Where is it reported  How is the data utilised to inform 
decision making?  Automated 
or Manual 
process?  Are there 
exemplars in 
other Council’s?  What are the gaps?  
Scope 
1 Gas, LPG and 
Oil for 
heating 
buildings  Property  Electronic record of fuel consumption held for 
each commercial building from bills. All 
metered for Mains gas whilst oil and LPG 
consumption are largely calculated based on 
delivery notes. kWh then converted in to 
tCO2e  Internally  Data used to ascertain whether 
there is a general trend in reducing 
energy consumption and to 
determine which buildings to 
prioritise in energy efficiency 
projects such as Re:Fit.  Manual      
Scope 
1 Fuel 
consumption 
in fleet 
vehicles  Fleet  Fuel  consumption (Diesel, LPG, Petrol)  / 
mileage.  Annual totals of fuel consumption 
available from sales receipts / delivery 
reports. Also available monthly when figures 
are sent to finance for recharging 
departments. Figures can be converted to 
CO2e  Interna l within the service and 
sometimes externally. Fleet data 
has been sent to the welsh 
government energy service as part 
of the ULEV project who’s intention 
is to provide us with a report which 
will hopefully help us in making 
future decisions with regards t o the 
fleet.  Has been used to calculate costs per 
mile  Manual  Not sure, 
perhaps 
Swansea 
Council who 
implemented a 
fleet of approx. 
40 electric vans 
a couple of 
years ago    
Scope 
2 Electricity 
usage in 
buildings  Property  Electronic record of electricity  consumption 
for each commercial building held which can 
be converted to tCO2e  Internally  Data used to ascertain whether 
there is a general trend in reducing 
energy consumption and to 
determine which buildings to 
prioritise in energy efficiency 
projects such as Re:Fit.  Manual      
Scope 
2 Street 
lighting  Highways  Monthly electricity consumption of street 
lighting from bills & monthly carbon 
emissions by PowerData Associates.  Internally  The data is regularly assessed and 
discussed with the Senior Engineer 
in team meetings.  Manual      
Scope 
2 EV Charging  Fleet  Record kept of Electricity usage relating to 
charging of electric vehicles - can be 
converted to tCO2e  Internal within the service and 
sometimes externally. Fleet data 
has been sent to the welsh 
government energy service as part 
of the ULEV project who’s i ntention 
is to provide us with a report which 
will hopefully help us in making 
future decisions with regards to the 
fleet.  
 
 Has been used to calculate costs per 
mile  Manual       
5 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Scope 
3 Water supply 
to buildings 
and waste 
water 
returned as 
sewerage  Property  Record held of water usage for all commercial 
buildings which can be converted to tCO2e. 
Bi-annual billing received for most sites.  Internally  If there is a significant increase in 
consumption in a building from one 
year to the next, a site investigation 
is undertaken where possible to 
check for leaks.  Manual - 
extremely 
laborious 
process    Paper bills are still received and 
scanned to Civica, meaning each site 
has to be searched for manually 
which is laborious and prone to 
human error. Unlik e energy contracts. 
This has not been taken over by 
procurement and put on consolidated 
electronic billing.  
Scope 
3 Recycling 
and waste 
from 
commercial 
buildings  Procurement  Annual report available from contractor who 
carries out the service with waste in  kg for 
each building. This can then be converted  to 
CO2e  Internally and externally          
Scope 
3 Municipal 
Waste  Waste  Total annual tonnage of kerbside collection, 
Recycling Sites and bring sites available with 
breakdown for different types of waste / 
recyclate. Can be converted to tCO2e  Both internal and external in line 
with WG requirements. We input 
all data on Waste Da ta Flow  Once the data is rolled up on WDF 
we’re given our 
monthly/quarterly/annual recycling 
figures. We assess the quarterly 
figures and identify where we need 
to improve for the next quarter. The 
data is sent internally as a 
Performance indicator and is  
discussed with elected members if 
targets aren’t met.  Data is 
inputted 
manually       
6 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 What else needs to be included?  
  
Scope  Source  Emissions  Owner  Comments  
Scope 1  Fuel 
Combustion  Gas, LPG and Oil for heating housing communal areas.  Housing  Unsure if monitored at present – Will be very insignificant in overall figure.  
Scope 2  Purchased 
Electricity  Electricity usage in housing communal areas.  Housing  Unsure if monitored at present – Will be very insignificant in overall figure.  
Scope  1 FGases  Refrigerant gases from air conditioning  Property / IT  Unsure if monitored at present – Will be very insignificant in overall figure.  
Scope 3  Staff Travel  Commuting  All departments  Not monitored at present  
Scope 3  Staff travel  Personal vehicle business use  Fleet / All departments  Unsure if monitored at present.  
Scope 3  Procurement  Purchased goods and services  All departments  Not monitored at present. Very high emissions associated with procurement.  
Scope 3  Investments         
7 
 ANNEX C 
Isle of Anglesey County Council Climate Activity Baseline  
Title Implementation 
Period  Lead Service/ 
Corporate  Overview  Recent Achievements  Delivery 
Mechanism 
(Internal/ 
Contract)  Reports to?  
Energy Island 
Programme  Ongoing  Regulation & 
Economic 
Development  The EIP’s vision is to create a once in a lifetime 
opportunity for jobs, economic growth and 
prosperity through capitalising on a number of 
transformational projects putting Anglesey and 
the wider region at the forefront o f low carbon 
energy, research and development, production 
and servicing.  
The Energy Island Programme collaborates 
with a number of key stakeholders to:  
 Attract and de -risk major strategic 
investment  
 Influence potential developers  
 Support development of competitive 
people and communities  
 Support development of competitive 
businesses  
 Support development of 
competitive  infrastructure  
 Realise the benefits major projects can 
bring and mitigate adverse impacts  
 Maximise long -term legacy benefits   Ongoing  Internal  Service 
Delivery Plan 
& IACC Level 
2 Governance   
8 
 Regulation & 
Economic 
Development 
Service Delivery 
Plan 2019 -2020  Regulation & 
Economic 
Development  The Vision of the Service is ‘to create a better 
Island to live, work and visit by strengthening 
the social, economic, environmental and 
cultural well -being of Anglesey and its 
communities”.  
 
It aims to:  
 Manage and control the development and 
use of land and buildings to develop the 
economy, support communities and 
safeguard the environment.  
 Promote and protect a safe, fair and 
healthy living and working environment for 
resident s and businesses.  
 Develop the visitor economy, promote the 
enjoyment of natural resources and 
effectively manage coastal assets.  
 Develop and deliver activities to enable job 
creation, increase prosperity, and support 
vibrant and resilient communities.  
 Maximise positive benefits from major 
projects, whilst mitigating adverse impacts, 
to ensure a positive and sustainable 
legacy.  
 Provide leisure facilities and activities for 
people, of all ages, to live their lives in a 
healthy way.  
  Construction of Pen - Yr-
Orsedd Business Units 
and extension of 
Anglesey Business 
Centre utilised renewable 
energy technology 
including solar PV panels 
on each unit, energy 
efficiency measures and 
electric vehicle charging 
points.  
 Market Hall, Holyhead re -
development complete d 
with works aiming 
towards BREEAM 
excellence standards;  
 TRIP Empty Properties 
Thematic Project 
(2018/19 & 2019/20 & 
2020/21) –– anticipate 
that 98 households will 
have been supported to 
improve the energy 
efficiency of their homes 
(Anglesey & North 
Gwyned d sub -regional 
scheme, IACC is lead 
body)  
  Baseline information 
collected on energy 
performance of leisure 
centres during 2019.  
 
 
 
 
 
 Internal  Regulation & 
Economic 
Development 
Senior 
Management 
Team   
9 
  Installed LED lighting 
across all leisure centres 
to improve energy 
efficiency (further energy 
efficiency improvement 
work s to take place in 
March -September 2020 
which includes: Solar PV, 
Boiler Optimisation, 
Insulation etc.)  
 AONB activities improved 
human behaviour towards 
climate change by 
promoting beach cleans 
and plastic free island.   
 Planning function 
relocated to the Council 
Headquarters as part of 
the Council’s Smarter 
Working project (reduces 
energy use and better 
efficiency etc).  
 Ongoing work by Public 
Protection – e.g. safe 
storage and dispensing of 
petroleum at licenced 
sites; Inspections of 
industrial processes 
subject to Environmental 
Permits controlling air 
pollution; Statutory 
Private Water Supply 
samples; Pest Control 
response.  
 Annual review and 
assessment of air quality 
on Anglesey  
  
10 
 Asset 
Management 
Plan 2020 - 2025  Highways, 
waste and 
Property 
(Property 
Section)  The Corporate Asset Management Plan sets 
the strategic framework within which all the 
IACCs assets will be managed. It is intended to 
guide future decisions concerning the 
acquisition, use, development and disposal of 
property assets to meet the operationa l and 
strategic needs of the organisation and its 
different Service areas. It seeks to ensure that 
the portfolio of land and property is managed 
effectively to remain fit -for-purpose (within the 
current period of resource and finance 
constraints).   
 
The a im of the Corporate Asset Management 
Plan is to ensure assets support current and 
future service requirements and provide the 
means to prioritise future investment and 
rationalisation decisions.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Numerous assets have 
been transferred to Town 
& Community Councils to 
run, preserving service 
provision and generating 
revenue savings.  
 Several surplus assets 
have been sold 
generating revenue 
savings and capital 
receipts resulting in a 
leaner asset portfolio.  
 Completion of 
Smallholding Rural Estate 
renovations resulted in 
modern more energy 
efficient housing and 
safer outbuildings for our 
tenants.  
 Completion of Smarter 
Working Project resulted 
in more agile workforce 
and efficient use of space 
in the main Council 
building.  
 Internal, 
external,  
public service 
& community 
groups  Land & Assets 
Group   
11 
 The aim will be progressed by:  
 
 Embedding a new culture of innovation that 
maximises the use of technology  
 Deliver services in a customer focussed 
way which is consistent with the IACCs 
core values and behaviours  
 Enabling transformation and further 
efficiencies through proactive portfolio 
management (wh ilst maximising income)  
 Managing the estate effectively  
 Maximising regeneration and well -being 
opportunities through effective 
procurement and joint -working  
 Protect and reduce overall harm to the 
environment.   
12 
 Buildings Refit  2018 -tbc Highways, 
waste and 
Property 
(Property 
Section)  Re:fit Cymru  is a framework for energy 
conservation retrofits within public sector 
buildings in Wales. It allows public bodies to 
include multiple buildings and saving measures 
within a single OJEU procured energy 
performance contracting framework providing 
energy red uction and alternative energy 
schemes which have scale.  
 
The main aims are:  
 
 To improve energy efficiency of the 
authorities public buildings in line with 
targets set in the energy efficiency strategy 
(2017 -2022)  
 To reduce the running cost of buildings  
 To lessen the environmental impact of the 
authorities buildings by reducing carbon 
emissions and by transitioning away from 
fossil fuels where possible.  Energy efficiency measures 
carried out thus far include:  
 
 Solar PV panels installed 
at Ysgol Kingsland and  
Ysgol Morswyn.  
 BMS strategy updated in 
Council Offices and Ysgol 
Uwchradd Bodedern.  
 Pipe lagging installed 
across numerous sites.  
 Savacontrols installed on 
cooling equipment in 
schools to reduce energy.  
 Llangefni Library LED 
lighting installed  Internal & 
External – 
Managed by 
IACC but 
delivered by 
the Larkfleet 
Group.  Land & Assets 
Group   
13 
 Schools 
Catering 
Contract  2020 – 2027  Learning  New Schools Catering Contract includes a 
requirement to conform with  The Environment 
(Wales) Act 2016 and the Plastic Free Island 
status.  
These elements within the contract will be 
continuously monitored and managed 
throughout the contract.  
  Contract  Learning 
Services 
Senior 
Leadership 
Team  
Safeguard 
species and 
habitats  On-going  Learning  Various projects within schools to safeguard 
species and habitats and educate the pupils on 
how planting trees and managing these 
habitats can help to combat climate change.   A forest called Coed y 
Felin situated behind 
Ysgol Syr  Thomas 
Jones has over 11,000 
trees that were planted 
by pupils from the 
school in 2011 and this 
site is by now 
developing in to a 
habitat for various 
animals and insects.  
 A group of pupils from this 
school also volunteer 
every year with the North 
Wales Nature Trust.  Internal   
 
 
  
14 
  Ysgol Y Borth have a 
wildlife area which 
contains a large pool of 
water and they have a 
tree planting scheme 
which has been running 
for the past ten years and 
has resulted in a 
significant increase in the 
number of trees on the 
site. 
 Ysgol Corn Hir have 
received trees from the 
Woodland trust and have 
created a wildlife area in 
the school field to ensure 
a suitable habitat for birds.  
 
 
 
 
 
   
15 
 Schools 
Grounds 
Maintenance 
contract  2019 – 2022  Learning  This contract includes the following 
requirements:  
o The chemical Known as 2:4:5 T (or any 
substance containing it) is banned from 
use on all properties of the Authority.  
o The contractor will ensure that no 
vegetation or environmental feature is 
affected by his actions and any claims 
for damage shall be met by the 
Contractor at his own expense, it is 
suggested that appropriate insurance be 
purchased.  
 
 These elements within the contract will 
be continuously monitored and 
managed throughout the contract  
  Contract  Learning 
Services 
Senior 
Leadership 
Team  
Street Lighting 
Energy & 
Carbon 
Reduction 
Programme  2012 - ongoing  Highways, 
waste and 
Property 
(Property 
Section)  The County Council are responsible for the 
maintenance and energy consumption of 9,801 
public street lighting and 844 illuminated signs.  
The service is committed to continue the 
reduction in energy and reduce the carbon 
emissions without  causing detrimental change 
to the wellbeing of Anglesey people.  Upgrade of street lighting 
lanterns to new energy 
efficient LED lanterns. 
The new LED lanterns 
has proven to reduce light 
pollution, light trespass, 
scenic intrusion, sky glow 
whilst also lim iting glare 
to a minimum. All of which 
have improved the ‘Dark 
Sky’ status for Anglesey.  
The Authority have 
received financial 
assistance from Salix 
grant funding and has 
now completed 99% of 
the upgrade. This 
initiative has already Internal & 
External – 
Managed by 
IACC but 
delivered by  
The 
Highways 
and Street 
Lighting 
Term 
Maintenance 
Contractor.  Land & Assets 
Group   
16 
 reduced the energy 
consumption and carbon 
by 2,247,000kwh and 
1,538 tonnes respectively 
since 2012.  
21st Century 
schools 
Modernisation 
Programme  Ongoing  Learning / 
Highways, 
waste and 
Property 
(Property 
Section)  The construction of three new schools within 
Band A of the programme has seen new 
schools located at Ysgol Cybi, Holyhead, Ysgol 
Rhyd y Llan, Llanfa ethlu and Ysgol Santes 
Dwynwen, Newborough. The final school within 
Band A will commence later this year.  
Schemes for Band B are currently under 
consultation which will focus on the Llangefni, 
Amlwch and Seiriol areas.  All three schools have 
achieved BREEAM 
Excellent rating.  
 
All three school have 
incorporated renewable 
energy through Solar pv 
and air source heat 
pumps.  
 
 
 
 Internal & 
External – 
Managed 
and Lead 
Design by 
IACC with 
external 
Consultant 
and 
contractor 
assistance.  School 
Modernisation  
Group   
17 
 Ysgol Rhyd Llan was 
constructed from low 
carbon straw bale wall 
panels and won the the 
Constructing Excellence 
award for Sustaina bility in 
both Wales and 
throughout the United 
Kingdom.  
 
LED lighting installed 
throughout the sites – both 
internally and externally.  
 
BMS systems installed on 
all building to allow remote 
monitoring of building 
performance with regards 
to energy, heating , 
ventilation, leak detection, 
fault detection etc  
 
All future new build school 
projects to include electric 
car charging points.   
18 
 Commissioning 
of Care 
Services.  On-going.  Adult Services  Council Plan 2017 – 2022  
“We will be working towards an  
Anglesey that is healthy, thriving  
and prosperous”  
 
OBJECTIVE 1  
Ensure that the people of Anglesey  
can thrive and realise their long term 
Potential.  
 
 Deliver services in a customer focussed 
way which is consistent with the IACCs 
core values and behaviours.  
 
All Tender applications in the future will ask 
applicants to demonstrate their commitment to 
economic, social and environmental wel l-being 
of the Island as a whole.  
Tenders will also be asked to consider and 
evidence understanding of ethical procurement 
/ supply chains and modern day slavery.  
 
Contracts will stipulate and expect the 
following:  
 Transformation of Domiciliary 
Care and support.  
 
Tender process required 
applicants to provide a:  
 
 Demonstration of an 
ability to deliver 
sensitive and 
appropriate services 
to the whole of 
Anglesey  
 Commitment to 
Economic, social and 
Environmental well -
being of the Island a s 
a whole.  
 Demonstration of the 
unique characteristic 
of the organisation 
which will add value 
for users and 
commissioners  
 
The remodelling moved 
providers from across the 
Island to small patches. This 
significantly reduced travel for 
staff whilst offerin g the 
supported individuals better 
outcomes.   
 Internal, 
external,  
public service 
& community 
groups  ??  
19 
 Economic:  
 Employ Local People from Loc al 
Communities they serve  
 Pay at least Living Wage  
 Guarantee hours to staff, enabling access 
to mortgages.  
 Develop staff through QCFs – increasing 
skill levels/future employability  
 Purchase goods locally – 
catering/stationery/equipment.  
 Employ individuals with Disability  
 
Social:  
 Create a library of local 
services/groups/amenities in Anglesey  
 Maximise opportunities for Service Users 
to access the community  
 Support local groups/committees   
 Choice – “Active Offer” - delivering service 
through preferred langua ge of service user.  
 
 
 
Environmental:  
 Minimise travel -time between care visits  
 Demonstrate initiatives such as recycling 
bins, solar panels etc.  
 Support Service Users to conserve 
water/gas/electricity  
 Support recycling  
 Electronic Call monitoring – reduces the 
need for paper rotas and timesheets.  Moving to smaller patches 
has also help develop and 
stimulate local economy by 
keeping recruitment local and 
sustainable.  
 
The contract terms stipulate 
that employers must pay their 
staff at least the national living 
wages and that Zero hour 
contracts must not be used – 
allowing the employed more 
job security.  
 
  
20 
  Use of on line training (where appropriate) 
/ skype etc. – reduces travel for staff.  
 Work with housing providers to ensure 
homes are insulated where needed.  
 
 
Flood and 
Coastal Erosion 
Risk 
Management  
(FCERM)  
Grants 
Programme   
Continuous   
Highways, 
waste and 
Property  
(Highways 
Service)   
The department follows the Authority’s Local 
Flood Risk Management Strategy and 
investigates incidents of flooding and where 
appropriate, applies to Welsh Government for 
Grant Aid to implement Studies and S chemes to 
adapt to the effects of Climate Change.    
Previously completed works 
include:  
Beaumaris Sea Wall and 
Trearddur bay wall / coastal 
defences.  
 
The current position is as   
 follows.  
 
Works currently on site;  
 
•Beaumaris Flood Alleviation 
Work on  site is ongoing with  
The floods 
team and 
Highway 
Maintenance 
team work 
together to 
record and 
investigate 
flood incidents 
and Highway 
Maintenance 
implement 
small grant 
aided FCERM 
schemes.  
Major 
schemes are 
managed by 
Major Projects  
Head of 
Service 
Highways, 
Waste and 
Property.  
and 
Transformation 
Board.   
21 
 completion anticipated in 
spring 2020.  
 
 
 
•Nant Y Felin, Pentraeth  
Work on site is ongoing with 
completion anticipated in 
summer 2020.  
•Maes Hafoty, Llansadwrn  
Work on site is ongoing with 
completion anticipated in 
March 2020.  
•Smal l Scale Schemes (value 
up to £100k). Works ongoing 
or to be completed by March 
2020  
         Dwyran  
         Llangristious  
         Rhos yr Aur, Niwbwrch  
         Bryn Cadnant  
         Lon Ravenspoint  
         Lon Caergybi, Llanfair  
 
 in Highways 
with studies 
and business 
cases being 
carried out 
largely by 
consultants   
22 
 
         Ty’n Pwll Llangoed  
         Mill Lane – Beaumaris 
– advance purchase of 
grillage cleaning mechanism 
(for fitting in new structure in 
summer 2020)  
Outline Business cases 
complete  
 
•Menai Bridge – Penlon 
Catchment  
Business Case being 
considered by Welsh 
Government. If successful 
anticipated that design and 
development stage will take at 
least 12 months  
 
•Llanfairpwll  
Business Case being 
considered by Welsh 
Government. If successful 
anticipated that design and 
deve lopment stage will take at 
least 12 months  
 
 
  
23 
 •Valley  
Business Case being 
considered by Welsh 
Government. If successful 
anticipated that design and 
development stage will take 6 
to 12 months  
Business Justification Cases 
complete  
 
•Mill Lane Beaumaris  
Business Justification Cases 
being considered by Welsh 
Government for new structure 
in Mill Lane, Beaumaris. To 
accommodate new grillage 
cleaning mechanism  
Outline Business cases 
ongoing  
 
•Holyhead  
Outline business case being 
prepared, collaborating with 
Welsh Water on modelling, 
with anticipated completion in 
Autumn 2020 for submission 
to Welsh Government.  
  
24 
 •Amlwch  
Outline business case being 
prepared, liaising with natural 
Resources Wales on Main 
River aspect, with anticipated 
completion in Summer 2020 
for submission to Welsh 
Government.  
Coastal Risk Management 
Schemes  
 
•Red Wharf Bay  
Design and Development 
stage about to begin, 
anticipated 12 month period.  
 
•Brynsiencyn  
Design and Development 
stage ongoing, anticipated 
completion June 2020.  
•B5109 - Llanfa es 
This scheme has not been 
successful in obtaining grant 
funding, as no homes are 
being protected. It is a priority 
for the Highway Service, due 
to the vulnerability of the road 
and the curre nt frequency of 
closures due to flooding (tidal  
25 
 and fluvial). We are 
pressuring WG to consider 
funding schemes where 
connectivity of communities is 
under threat. And considering 
the recently announced 
Climate Change resilience 
fund as a possible funding 
source.  
•Small Scale Schemes for 
2020_21. We are anticipating, 
imminently, an invitation to 
apply for small scale schemes 
for the 2020 -21 financial year 
and believe the invite will 
encourage applications up to 
the value of £200k. A list is in 
preparation in cluding works in 
Benllech.   
 
Shoreline Management Plan  
The shoreline management 
plan provides policy guidance 
on coast protection around 
the coast. It reflects climate 
change and predictions of sea 
level rise and sets out the 
policy to be followed at 
individual lengths of the 
coastline.  
  
26 
 Around the Coast of Anglesey 
we have 12 locations where 
the policy guidance is 
changing as time progresses, 
from holding the line to 
managed retreat and in two 
cases, no active intervention. 
Further work is required to 
identify the challenges 
presented by these policy 
changes in these areas of 
Anglesey.    
HWB Grant – 
Transforming IT 
in Education  2019 -2023  Education/IT  A Welsh Government Grant to transform ICT in 
Education. The grant aims to standardise on 
hardware in schools to ensure there is enough 
ICT resource for pupils. This has the residual 
benefit of ensuring procurement exercises are 
aligned and al l equipment must be compliant 
with environmental standards and packaging 
must conform to strict parameters such as 
recycled cardboard content, no surplus plastic 
packaging etc.  First round of procurement 
has led to network equipment 
which is more efficien t being 
procured which will lead to a 
reduction in energy use when 
installed. Second round has 
established a set of standards 
with which a second round of 
procurement is ongoing for 
end user devices. This will 
ultimately see the removal of 
older high energ y use 
equipment lowering the 
footprint of IT in schools.  Internal  HWB Project 
Board – Rhys 
H Hughes 
(Chair)   
27 
 ICT Department  Ongoing  IT The ICT department is realigning its ICT 
Infrastructure plans to ensure environmental 
impact is assed when considering 
infrastructure plans. Any software that is run in 
the cloud will need to demonstrate the 
environmental standards of their datacentres. 
Any hardware purchased will also be scored on 
efficiency. Currently working with property 
section through Re:Fit project to consider 
possible alternatives to cooling of the 
datacentres.  Servers are densely 
virtualised leading to lower 
power consumption, PCs 
have energy saving policies 
configured. The end user 
devices of the authority are 
procured through a framework 
which scores on energy 
efficiency and packaging type.  Internal  ICT Team 
Manager  
Waste 
Management  Ongoing  Highways, 
waste and 
Property  All our recycling efforts on Anglesey are carried 
out due to the requirements of WG’s national 
waste strategy, “Towards Zero Waste”. The 
fundamental objective of this strategy is to 
reduce carbon impact. In summary, the 
recycling pathway we are following is direct ly 
linked to helping the environment.   Internal / 
External   
28 
 Clean And 
Green Anglesey  On-Going  Waste 
Management  Following the announcement stating that 
Anglesey is now Plastic Free, a lot of work was 
needed to actually gain that status. This entire 
project  was lead under the assumption that 
there would be no funding and a lot of work 
has gone into improving internally  Status:  
No single use plastic freebies 
to be used in the Anglesey 
Show – Discussions have 
taken place and departments 
will be informed in due  course 
to not use single use plastic.  
Remove Plastic Bottles from 
vending machines – Steady 
progress being made in which 
our first improvement can 
lead to an 80% saving in the 
requirement of plastic in the 
main offices and 40% in all 
Sport Centres  
School Catering Contracts – 
Discussions have taken place 
to inform applicants of the 
importance of this. Potential 
improvement will be made but 
the risk is the contract will 
cost the authority more.  
 
Continue Going to Schools 
and offer site visits – We as 
Waste M anagement are now 
in a position to be able to go 
around schools and give talks 
to students and what can and 
cannot be recycled which in 
turn would increase recycling.     
29 
 Install Water Appliances in 
Newborough and Coastal 
Paths – Alun Owen has done 
fantastic w ork in securing a 
grant to be able to fund refill 
stations in popular 
destinations on the island.  
Terracycle Scheme – Siop 
Ellis in Llangefni has kindly 
agreed to receive our office 
waste as long as everything is 
in order. There are 4 
initiatives that I wo uld like for 
us to take part in – Chocolate 
Wrappers, Crisp Packets, 
Biscuit Packaging and Writing 
instruments.   
Moving to Parc Adfer – 
Household residual waste is 
now being transported to Parc 
Adfer instead of our previous 
provider which was Andusia 
in Sweden. That in itself is a 
massive saving on emissions 
on the haulage alone.  
  
30 
 Housing 
Revenue 
Account Asset 
Management 
Strategy  2018 -23 Housing 
Services  Strategy has 6 objectives:  
 Stock Data and Investment Need  
 Active Asset Management  
 Investment Planning  
 Maximising Returns  
 Affordability and Viability  
 Delivery Plan  
    
Planned 
Maintenance 
Programme  2013 - ongoing  Housing 
Services  During 2013 the Service entered a new phase 
of Traditional Planned Maintenance Contracts 
(PMC) following successful completion of the 
Internal Investment Programme and achieving 
WHQS compliance.  
 
A key driver for deciding investment need and 
priority has and will continue to be property 
energy ratings.  
 
Planned maintenance contracts awarded for 
2020/21 involve properti es that are off the 
mains gas network and, currently, have energy 
rating below WHQS targets.  Wherever practical, 
properties with solid wall 
construction have been 
externally insulated.  
 
Since 2013, 719 properties 
have benefitted from 
traditional planned 
maintenance contracts. 
Typically, contracts include 
the following energy saving 
measures:  
 
External Wall Insulation;  
Replacement Cavity Wall 
Insulation;  
Solar PV installations ;  
Replacement windows and 
doors;  
 Internal  Annual 
Business Plan 
approved by 
the Executive, 
Full Council 
and Welsh 
Government   
31 
 Increased Loft insulation.  
During 2020/21 work  will 
continue on two contracts 
involving 120 properties. 
These properties at 
Aberffraw, Rhosneigr, 
Llangoed and Llanddona 
have bulk LPG as a main 
fuel source.  
 
Fuel switching  2012 - 15 Housing 
Services  Housing Services worked in partnership with 
Wales and West Utilities and British Gas in 
order to assess the feasibility of extending the 
mains gas network on Anglesey.  
 
As a result a further 230 properties benefit from 
mains gas connections.  Notable beneficiaries of this 
scheme included the villages 
of Llanerchymedd and 
Llanfaes together with 
Tyddyn Mostyn Estate in 
Menal Bridge.  
 
All properties benefit from 
increased energy ratings 
and reduced carbon 
footprints.  Internal and 
External 
Partners.    
32 
 Loft Insulation  2012 - 15 Housing 
Services  In partnership with British Gas a rolling 
programme of installing or increasing the depth 
of loft insulation was rolled out to the benefit of 
the Housing Stock.  Over 1300 installations 
contributing towards energy 
efficiency targets and 
helping to provide 
households with affordable 
warmth.  Internal and 
External 
Partner   
Renewable 
Energy  2011 - ongoing  Housing 
Services  The Housing Service installs Solar PV 
wherever practical during Planned 
Maintenance Schemes and stand alone Solar 
PV schemes.  
 
Solar PV electric generation is free to the end 
user which will assist in the eradication of fuel 
poverty.  503 of the housing sto ck 
benefit from Solar PV.  
 
A further 87 properties have 
Solar Thermal installations.  
 
During 2019 a Solar PV 
scheme involving 36 
properties served by bulk 
LPG saw average EPC 
ratings increase from 53 to 
73. Internal   
WHQS 
Compliance  Ongoing  Housing 
Services  The target WHQS energy performance is a 
SAP rating of 65.  
A full stock condition survey published during 
2011 confirmed that the average rating for the 
housing stock was 63.  
 
The Housing Service WHQS Compliance 
Policy includes the following targe ts: During 2019/20 the energy 
rating (SAP) of over 1000 
properties have been 
reassessed to measure 
increased energy ratings. 
Average ratings for these 
properties have increased 
from an average 68 to 75.  
 Internal and 
externa l 
Independent 
Energy 
Assessors.  Periodic 
reporting and 
annual 
statistical 
returns to WG.  
 
Housing 
Board   
33 
  
 An average EPC rating of 70 across 
the whole stock  
 90% of the stock will have a rating of 
65 or above  
 
The Housing Service annual 30 year Business 
Plan allows for renewing central heating boilers 
every 15 years.  
 
 Overall average stock 
energy performance has 
now reached 70 (Band C)  
Procurement  Ongoing  Housing 
Services  Major contracts procured by Housing include 
Targeted Recruitment & Training ,  Wider 
Community Benefits and Supply -chain 
Opportunities requirements.  
 
Key elements include:  
 Training and recruitment  
 Local supply chain opportunities  
 Wider community benefits linked with 
the local area  
 Completion of Value Wales Community 
Benefit Measurement Tool on contract 
completion  
 
All capital tender opportunities are advertised 
via the sell2wales portal.  
The Housing Service vision is to ensure that 
local contractors and supply chains are given Since 2013 82% of 
Traditional Planned 
Maintenance Contracts have 
been awarded to contrac tors 
based in NW Wales.  
 
59% of the above mentioned 
contracts have been 
awarded to Anglesey based 
contractors.  Internal with 
external 
contractors  Value Toolkits 
submitted to 
and monitored 
by WG   
34 
 every opportunity to compete for annual capital 
contracts.  
Awarding contracts to local suppliers engaging 
the local workforce will contribute towards 
carbon reduction whilst promoting job creation 
and job retention.  
New build 
(Council and 
RSL partners 
social housing)  On going  Housing 
Services  Achieving the highest rate of EPC is a priority 
for new builds  
 If properties are off gas 
network air source heat 
pumps are installed.  
 
Working towards ‘fabric first’ 
approach  
 Internal as 
well as 
working with 
partner RSL  Housing 
Services  
Board  
  
35 
  
  
36 
  
ANNEX D 
 
 
 
 
Highways, Waste and Property  Service  
 
 
Best Practice Suggestions to Tackle Climate 
Change and Recommendations for Consideration  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
November 2020 
 
 
 
Author s:  
Simon J. Franco & Dylan Ll. Jones  
 
37 
 1.0 Purpose  
1.1 To provide an overview of current best practice activities that could be adopted to 
contribute to tackle climate change locally.  
1.2 To provide recommendations on how the IACC could move forward in contributing to 
tackling climate change follo wing its recent climate emergency announcement.  
2.0 Context  
2.1 The 2015 Paris Agreement has put in place a roadmap for decarbonisation of the 
global economy.  
2.2 UK Government became the first major economy to pass net zero emissions law in 
June 2019. The new target will require the UK to bring all greenhouse gas emissions 
to net zero by 2050, compared with the previous target of at least 80% reduction from 
1990 le vels. The UK’s 2050 net zero target — one of the most ambitious in the world 
— was recommended by the Committee on Climate Change, the UK’s independent 
climate advisory body. Net zero means any emissions would be balanced by schemes 
to offset an equivalent  amount of greenhouse gases from the atmosphere, such as 
planting trees or using technology like carbon capture and storage.  
2.2 The Welsh Government have set out a target to achieve a net zero carbon public sector 
in Wales by 2030. The Welsh Government a nd over half of all local authorities having 
declared a climate emergency to date with an intention to take action on climate 
change in their organisation and/or local area.  
2.4  In September 2020, the IACC has declared a climate emergency to achieve carb on 
neutral status by 2030.  
2.5   The recommendations outlined in  this report are based on knowledge gained from a number 
of recent conferences and webinars as summarised in table below:  
Event  Date  Contents summary  
LGC Climate change 
2020  17-18/09/2929   Investments  
 Green Recovery  
 Engagement  
 Communication  
 Climate Emergency  
 Strategy / Leadership   Net Zero targets  
 Priorities  
 Partnerships  
 Metrics  
 Travel / Transport  
 Procurement  
Climate Emergency 
Virtual Round Table  25/09/2020   Policy Context  
 Climate Action On 
Budgets   Supporting Local 
Authorities  
 Environmental 
Good Practice  
Low Carbon Connections 
Conference - 
Decarbonisation of Heat 
and Transport  30/09/2020   Focus on the newly 
produced Transport 
Maps from Charge EV 
project  
  Decarbonisation 
Of Heat   
38 
 Locking in positive 
behaviours and the co -
benefits of green 
recovery webinar  02/10/2020   Locking in positive 
behaviours and the 
co-benefits of green 
recovery   Co-benefits of 
‘Green Recovery’  
NORTH WEST WALES 
AREA STATEMENT S 
(NRW)  16-27/11/2020   Area Statements, let’s 
review where we are.  
 Climate and 
environment 
emergency.  
 Reconnecting people 
with nature   Encouraging a 
sustainable 
economy.  
 Ways of working.  
 Opportunities for 
resilient 
ecosystems  
 
  
3.0 Leading a climate smart strategy  
 
3.1 A positive, practical vision is  the first step to ensuring an attainable climate strategy.  
Some of the key considerations required are outlined below:  
  
Technical readiness  
 Are the technologies / behaviours needed to 
reduce carbon emissions available and ready to 
deploy?  
Policy readiness  
 Do plans and policies that are in place support 
delivery?  
Financial readiness  
 Are funds available? Are there investable 
options within the business models ready to be 
deployed?  
Community readiness  
 Do the wider community, members of the 
publi c and businesses support the action 
required?  
Delivery readiness  
 Are the necessary skills and supply chains ready 
to deliver?  
 
3.2 The following chart summarises some of the main elements when integrating climate 
change in to council decision making:   
39 
  
 
4.0 Local priorities and role in delivering net zero  
 
4.1 All decarbonisation can’t be done at national level and it is important that local 
authorities play their part at a regional and local level.  
4.2 Climate change is a crosscutting issue that needs to be considered in all operational 
activities undertaken by the local authority. Local authorities have influence or direct 
control in many areas that are crucial in delivering net zero.  Some of which are listed 
below:  
 New policies should contribute to climate emergency 
declaration, including all major planning proposals.Integrate climate change in to all 
decision making.Climate 
Emergency 
DeclarationCarbon literacy / 
awareness for 
staff
Annual Reviews 
and progress 
reportsInvestment 
Roadmap
•Buildings
•TravelDirect Control
•Goods and services Procurement
•Power tocontrol development and transport Place shaping
•Inovating, piloting, demonstrating and rewarding good practice Showcasing
•Brining people and organisations together Conveying and contributing
•Translating global and national climate targets forlocal level Engaging 
40 
 5.0 Best Practice Suggestions to t ackle climate change     
5.1 This section of the report provides an overview of the themes that was raised as best 
practice in recent conferences that the IACC should consider in its approach to tackling 
climate change locally.   
5.2 Implementing an Action  Plan  
5.2.1  Some of the actions required after declaring a climate emergency are as follows:  
 
 
  
OWN  Senior owner to co -ordinate climate action across departments and functions.  
 
UNDERSTAND  Assess the key local causes and impact of climate change to inform focus.  
 
PLAN  Set targets and milestones and timeframe for meeting such actions.  
 
COLLABORATE  Local Authority can’t do all work required alone. Engagement with businesses, 
organisations and individuals is necessary.  
 
PRIORITISE  Identify which actions can have the biggest impacts.  
 
BUDGET  Costing of actions and business case preparation.  
 
INVEST  Secure investment  
 
IMPLEMENT  Set out implementation programme  
 Own
Understand
Plan
Collaborate
Prioritise BudgetInvestImplementMonitor
Key steps to effective climate action 
planning and implementation   
41 
 MONITOR  Collect data on results and performance and use to drive continued progress.  
 
5.3  Sustainable Transport  
5.3.1  The challenges and barriers to sustainable travel include safety perception, conflict / 
sharing of road network between different user groups, over reliance of the private car 
in rural areas.  
5.3.2  There are a number of opportunities that could be conside red in decarbonising the 
transport sector. These include: enthusiasm and appetite in cycling and walking since 
the Covid -19 pandemic, Active Travel Act 2013 and priorities associated with the Act 
as set out by Welsh Government, how more active travel can c ontribute towards the 
WBFGA 2015.  
5.3.3  To contribute towards climate change initiatives could include: investment in 
infrastructure to improve the provision of cycling and walking, e -bike trials, electric fleet 
vehicles, EV charge points, park and ride f acilities, individuals to minimise dependence 
on private car (financial incentives), engagement with local residents to understand 
people’s barriers towards active travel and seek understanding on their aspirations and 
creating a fit for purpose local tran sport plan.     
5.3.4  De-carbonising the transport sector is also a key factor in tackling climate change. This 
could be achieved by creating a fit for purposes local transport plan,  
 
5.4 Influencing Human Behaviours  
 
5.4.1  Climate change needs behaviour change, integrating behavioural science is 
fundamental when attempting to bring about change within and organisation and is crucial for 
public engagement. Society must change the way we heat our homes and offices, travel and  
consume products and services. This requires action on an individual level but also requires 
change at a broader societal level.  
 
5.4.2  There are multiple influences on behaviour such as travel or household energy 
efficiency. Changing human habits are on e of the biggest barriers to behavioural 
change. Habit leads to ‘tunnel vision’ where the same behaviour will be repeated until 
a particular habit can be disrupted through change or an event.  
5.4.3  Education and information at school or colleges can influ ence behaviours of the next 
generation with regards to climate change and issues such as recycling and can 
influence their parents/families. This could go further by introducing climate change 
as part of the school curriculum. However, intervention is also  required at the 
workplace and needs to be developed as the ‘social norm’. Activities could include 
training sessions on climate change, incorporate as part of induction, introduce 
internal policy on climate change, and promote climate change champions in each 
Service to introduce behavioural change e.g. posters / advice on recycling / reducing 
electricity use.    
42 
  
5.4.4  The EAST framework can be used in order to bring about behavioural changes:  
Easy  - People often take the path of least resistance. You can therefore encourage 
desirable behaviours by removing small frictions or hassles, by defaulting people into 
the desirable choice, or by redesigning the way choices are presented to make the 
desirable behaviours easier.  
Attractive - Humans are more likely to  adopt a behaviour when it captures our 
attention or is in line with our motivation and beliefs. You can draw attention with 
visual cues that are particularly relevant or noticeable, and leverage motivation by 
emphasizing the positives and using incentives . 
Social - Human behaviour is hugely influenced by what others around us are doing. 
You can promote desirable actions by highlighting the fact that other people are 
adopting them. You can also make behaviour more publicly visible, and emphasize 
opportuniti es for people to help each other.  
Timely  - People are creatures of habit, so nudges are most effective at moments of 
change in people’s lives. We also have a deep tendency to emphasize the present 
more than the future. You can harness these tendencies by t iming campaigns 
strategically, highlighting the immediate benefits of sustainable actions, and helping 
people plan ahead.  
5.5 Property  
5.5.1  Many steps that can be taken by local authorities include both social and environmental 
issues, some of the fundamental measures are listed below:  
5.5.2  Building maintenance –The need to reduce energy and contribute to decarbonisation 
should be considered when carrying out any building works.  
5.5.3   Decarbonisation of heating – Priority should be given to seek t o decarbonise heating 
in line with Welsh Government aspirations. This is particularly relevant to IOACC due 
to the considerable number of sites which do not have mains gas and are heated via 
more carbon intensive LPG or oil.  
5.5.4  Energy efficiency – Works to improve energy efficiency of buildings should be carried 
out in order to achieve the target set out in the energy management strategy.  
5.5.5   Biodiversity – Ensure that any biodiversity lost due to building maintenance / 
construction is adequately  replaced and increased.  
 
5.6 Harnessing public engagement and securing partnerships  
5.6.1  It is important not to assume knowledge when engaging with the public, a recent study by 
Energy catapult UK demonstrated that less than 49% of people were aware that  energy 
consumed at home contribute to climate change.  
 
  
43 
   
5.6.2  People struggle to make the connection with climate change and their daily lives, whilst they 
are aware it is a big global issue, they fail to make the connection at an individual level.  
5.6.3 It is therefore important to talk about things of interest to the intended audience, for example 
by showing that living and working in more environmentally friendly ways, not only reduces 
the consumption of resources but also results in financial savings  for individuals and 
organisations.  
5.6.4  Significant progress can be made by capitalising on the current situation “to push against open 
doors” when harnessing public engagement and securing partnerships.  The renewed 
appreciation for nature and green spa ces during the COVID -19 pandemic for example, 
provides an opportunity to engage the public on wider environmental and social issues. Active 
travel is another area that has seen a surge in interest during the pandemic with many people 
opting to cycle.  
5.7 Funding, legal and strategic policy  
 
5.7.1  Funding, legal and strategic policy, provide the technical underpinning to enable the leaders 
to deliver on the vision of responding to climate change.  
5.7.2  Carbon neutrality is best learnt by doing. IOACC needs to get own house in order, lead that 
agenda , make sure operations achieve carbon neutrality as quickly as possible and then 
consider the wider issues. Having a councillor responsible for climate action is advisable to 
lead on and oversee this agenda.  
5.7.3 Every opportunity to challenge the carbon impacts of each decision made (eg. Budgets, 
planning, land use, regulation) needs to be taken and subsequently ensure that the wider 
community is taken on the journey too, through securing partnerships and via pu blic 
engagement.  
5.7.4  As Climate Change is a devolved matter, it is recommended that a suitable officer from the 
IACC discusses directly with WG Energy Service on any funding streams that relates to climate 
change. It is understood from the conferences th at in England there are no specific funding 
pots for climate change, but rather, net zero should be part of future funding bids as it should 
be an integrated matter into projects or business as usual.  
5.8 Driving the agenda through procurement strategy  
 
5.8.1 The procurement process can be both a barrier and an opportunity for local authorities 
to build on social value. Through supply chain criteria, local authorities have wide 
levers and are in a position to bring about transformation.  
5.8.2  Historically,  environmental and social value aspects have somewhat been a 
compliance tick box exercise but moving forward they need to form a core part of the 
business case and decision making process. Standard metrics are a challenge, it is  
44 
 important to know which met rics to prioritise as they embed environmental value in to 
social value activities.  
5.8.3  Ensuring a sustainable procurement strategy will enable Isle of Anglesey County 
Council to meet its needs for goods, services, works and utilities in a way that 
achie ves value for money on a whole life basis and generates benefits not only to the 
authority, but also to society, the economy and the environment.  
5.8.4  The following steps can be implemented as a starting point for sustainable 
procurement:  
 Com mit to the principle  and make sure it is at the centre of the organisation  
 Developing a sustainable procurement plan for all council purchasing that 
encourages low energy and more sustainable options  
 Promoting local purchasing where possible  
 Assessing the carbon footprint of goods and services procured, in order to 
understand the impacts of existing procurement and commissioning  
 Producing a sustainable procurement code of practice for use across the authority.  
 Utilising whole -life costing when assessing all capita l projects  
 Transitioning to 100% renewable energy for own buildings and operations  
6.0 The Authority’s Carbon Footprint (Baseline)  
 
At present, Carbon data from a number of sources is available although it is not yet 
clear which sources of emissions should  be included when quantifying a total baseline 
figure  for the Authority .  
For example, the “greenhouse gas accounting tool” produced be the local government 
association and local partnerships states that authority housing should be excluded 
and is currentl y out of scope. It would therefore be beneficial to have clear and 
consistent guidance on this so that a concentrated effort can be made to calculate the 
emissions that need to be reported on.  
 
6.1 Available Emissions Data  
 Building Energy – Heating and Elec tricity  
 Water usage  
 Fleet – Fuel usage  
 Street Lighting – Electricity usage  
 Commercial building waste  
 Municipal waste  
 Housing – Carbon figure based on EPC rating.  
6.2 Emissions data that could be obtained with relative ease  
 Staff commuting  
 Business travel  
 
  
45 
  
 
6.3 Emissions data that is unquantifiable at present  
 Procurement – Estimated to be approximately 50% of the authorities emissions  
 Land Use  
 Leased assets and franchises  
7.0 Recommendations  
 
1. Develop an Action Plan with activities to include some of the r ealistic measures 
outlined in this report – activities need to be SMARTER (Specific, Measurable, 
Achievable, Realistic, Timely, Evaluate, Review)  
2. Sort out own house first (Internal arrangements/interventions) to tackle climate 
change  
3. Governance – all Counc il decisions to adhere to the Climate Change Action Plan / 
Vision  
4. Engage & Consult with the public to manage expectations and to understand 
aspirations  
5. Educate and provide information on climate change at schools and apply similar 
principles within the lo cal authority to promote behavioural change towards climate 
change (e.g. Climate Change Champions, Climate Change compulsory training, and 
financial incentives for cycling / walking to work).  Behaviour change is fundamental 
when dealing with climate change .  
6. Ensure all external applications for funding includes the cross -cutting theme of net 
zero / climate change as this is a key factor in funding decisions. Climate Change 
should be integrated into any funding future applications.  
7. Incorporate relevant envir onmental and social metrics in to the procurement process 
so they are given equal consideration to financial ones.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 