1-V14-FINAL  
 Carbon Neutral Hull  
 
 
An Environment and Climate Change 
Strategy  for 2020  - 2030  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2-V14-FINAL  
 Carbon Neutral Hull Framework  
 
 
Chart 1 : Carbon  Neutral Hull Framework  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3-V14-FINAL  
 Contents:  
 
Executive Summary         4 
Leadership           7 
Place            9 
The Approach          12 
The Challenge Ahead         14 
Energy: Heat           27 
Energy: Power          30 
Mobility           33 
Consumption          36 
Innovation           39 
Skills and Jobs          42 
Fair Transition          45 
Carbon Sequestration         48 
Glossary           51 
 
Appendix 1  Hull Peoples Panel June 2019 Climate Change Infographic  52 
Appendix 2  United Nations Sustainable Development Gaols    53 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  4-V14-FINAL  
 Executive Summary  
The decision by the Council  to declare a climate emergency in March 2019 is a 
significant point in the history and is the point at which Hull made its commitment to 
carbon neutrality which will be the key force shaping its future over the next ten 
years an d beyond.  
A Hull Peoples Panel survey in June 2019 found that 68% of residents agree that 
there is a climate emergency and 77% of residents think that climate change is a 
threat.  Addressing climate change is therefore a key issue for our residents.  
Our vi sion is for Hull to become a leading carbon neutral city within the U nited 
Kingdom (UK)  by 2030, to have taken all possible action , under its control,  to reduce 
emissions so that Hull become s fully carbon neutral by 2030.  
The achievement of carbon neutrality by Hull for 2030 is a big challenge , and one 
that requires significant policy and funding change that can only be delivered by 
Government. Therefore, based upon the national net zero target for 2050 , 
established within the Climate Change Act , and the current policy and funding 
landscape, Hull will aim for a minimum carbon reduction of 77% by 2030 from its 
2005 carbon emissions1. As Hull’s  target is to achieve carbon neutrality by 2030, 20 
years earlier than the national 2050 target, the Council, together with partners, will 
campaign for national policy changes and additional funding to ensure Hull’s carbon 
neutrality is delivered by 2030.  
The strategy  is based around eight interlinking themes setting out 34  challenges 
which  provide the points of focus for Hull activity over the next ten years to become  
carbon neutral by 2030. The themes are interdependent and it is only by seeing 
these in the round and working across them , that we can address the challenges. 
Some of the activity that needs to take  place will require changes in Government 
policy and increased levels of investment. These have been identified in the theme s 
below and the Council with partners across the city will press for the changes 
required to ensure that Hull is able to make the ch anges required.  
The eight themes represent the core challenge areas for the city and the areas 
where activity needs to be focused , to deliver the changes in the economy as well as 
the co -dependent social and environmental themes , all of which need to be wo ven 
together to successfully deliver a carbon neutral Hull that is  inclusive and  creates a 
better future for  current and future generations .  
The actions identified in each theme represent ambitious activity for the city and 
require a pace and scale of change that we have not experienced before. It will 
require bold leadership and commitment across all sectors in the city and 
fundamental changes in how we currently invest a nd do businesses. Organisations  
in the public , voluntary, educ ation  and private sector s in Hull , have a critical role to 
                                            
1 Gouldson, A. Sudmant, A. Duncan, A. (2019). “A summary carbon roadmap for Hull City Council”. 
Place -based Climate Action Network, https://pcancities.org.uk/  5-V14-FINAL  
 play (Chart 2) , not only in developing carbon neutral solutions for their organisations 
but also in educating their workforces in the changes required in day  to day business 
operations and also wh en away from work in their homes and communities.  
 
Chart 2: Leadership Structure for 2030  
 
The strategy  requires the mobilisation of ideas within the city and an open mind to 
the technological changes that will be required and will emerge over the next t en 
years. This document represents a first step in what needs to be achieved in this 
time and will be reviewed annually to capture changes in Government policy  and 
funding as well as innovation  and ideas generated in Hull . 
The strategy  though does not sit in isolation from  other strategies and plans for Hull  
(Chart 3 ). The Council will ensure that its key strategies and plans align with the 
2030 ambition and support the transition.  The Council w ill work with others in Hull  to 
help align activity with the v ision.  
The strategy  will begin  the conversation in our city of how together we can deliver on 
the commitment to become one of the leading carbon neutral cities in the UK by 
2030. Over the next 12 months we will undertake consultation  with businesses  and 
organisation across  Hull on the vision, challenges and actions to further refine them, 
identify new ones and bring together the resources and talent in Hull  to address the 
climate emergency.  
 
 
 
  Government
Residents
Public, Private and 
Voluntary Sector
Business 
Leadership Board 
and Hull City 
Council6-V14-FINAL  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chart 3 : Strategic plan relationship  (*awaiting publication in spring 2020; ^ to be produced by 
September  2021 ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Hull Carbon Neutral 2030 Strategy  
Local 
Industrial 
Strategy * City Plan  Corporate 
Plan Local 
Transport 
Plan 
 Local Plan  
Hull Climate Adaptation Strategy ^ Housing 
Strategy  
 Public 
Health 
Strategy  Digital 
Strategy  Air Quality 
Strategy  Capital 
Investment  7-V14-FINAL  
 Leadership  
The embedding of carbon neutral thinking and approaches within Hull requires 
strong, clear, decisive and insightful leadership within all major stakeholders in the 
City in the public, private and voluntary sectors.  
The achievement of our collective ambition, of Hull becoming the leading carbon 
neutral city, will help to secure the economic and social benefits derived fr om the 
future global carbon neutral economy and enable our city to grow and prosper.  
This will be achieved through a change in the culture within organisations and the 
city, and governance processes. The aim to become carbon neutral by 2030 
provides the d efining lens through which all investment decisions need to be viewed.  
It is at the heart of this transition, for our city, that collectively we do not embark on 
decisions that will create known problems for future generations of Hull residents. 
Delivering  a carbon neutral city requires an understanding of the long term impacts 
of decisions, before they are agreed , so that unintended negative consequences are 
avoided and time and resources are not wasted undoing or resolving problems that 
could have been identified  and avoided by viewing through a carbon neutral lens.  
The delivery of carbon neutrality provides Hull with the opportunity to forge a 
reputation as a leading authority in this necessary and essential transitioning just as 
its approach to  flood man agement has enabled the  city to gain a reputation as a 
leading flood adapted city.  
Carbon neutral leadership will bring confidence to investor s and provide certainty in 
the c ity’s journey and enable its ambitions to maximise the benefits from early 
adopti on of carbon neutral approaches.  
The Council has a strong role in establishing the strategy in key areas alongside 
partners. Collectively, all organisations in Hull will need to lobby Government to take 
its leadership role to enable change at a local level . 
All of Hull’s organisations also have a role , in preparing current and future 
employees for the impacts and opportunities of making Hull a carbon neutral city 
through training, suppo rt and the future design of employment .  
 
Leadership for a Carbon Neutral Hull  
Communications  
 Develop  training programme for all staff to raise the profile of 2030 target and staff 
engagement in energy and waste reduction  
 Understand staff attitudes and awareness of challenges for business and service 
area around carbon neutral economy and society  
 Identify opportunities for communicating/ raising awareness of target and 
decarbonisation , through internal event programmes  
 Continue to use the Hull Peoples Panel to explore attitudes to transition and views 
on approaches  8-V14-FINAL  
 Shap ing the Future  
 Establish a Climate Commission working across the Business  Leadership Board , 
Health and Well -Being and Placed Based Strategy Boards  
 Identify and lobby for national policy changes and local funding to enable delivery 
of the carbon neutral target for 2030  
 Produce Carbon Budget Roadmaps for the city covering mobility, energy, 
buildings, industry, land -use, land -use change and forestry  
 Understand the future cost  / implication of non -optimum decarbonisation solutions 
and investments  
 Zero emis sion transport infrastructure strategy  
 Citizens Inquiry: Provide wider civil society input into 2030 target actions  
 Ensure that climate proofing is undertaken of all major investment in the city to 
align with the recommendations of the National Infrastruct ure Commission  
 Develop Circular Economy strategy  for the city  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  9-V14-FINAL  
 Place  
Hull is home to 260 ,000 residents covering an area of 71.5 square  kilometres  and 
serves a trav el to work community of over 515 ,0002. It is the location for circa 8,000  
businesses with some of the largest global brands including SiemensGamesa, P&O, 
RB and Smith and Nephew  choosing to make Hull a key part of their business. Hull  
has a national centre for digital industries in C4Di, a world class University  and 
KCOM which has made Hull the leading ultrafast fibre broadband city in the UK with 
almost  100% coverage , enabling Hull to be at the forefront of the SMART economy.  
The Council has invested in a smart city platform to enable the revolution in smart 
technology and create an Intelligent City. As the  UK City of Culture Hull has  one of 
the most thriving arts comm unities in the north of England . The c ity has seen over 
£3billion of investment since 2013  that has seen GVA increase, employment an d 
visitor numbe rs grow.  
Through  its port complex Hul l is a gateway to Europe  and provides a vital trade and 
visitor link to our near continent ports in Holland  and Belgium as well as those in the 
Hanseatic ports in Scandinavia , the Baltic countries an d northern  Europe. Hull 
provides a link to the rest of the  world for the UK and o ne of the key entry points  to 
the country.  
Hull is the most exposed city in the UK , after London, to the impacts of flooding,  
which makes the city acutely aware of how climate change impacts res idents, 
businesses and infrastructure.  
However, we are not a  city without its challenges an d the effects of previous 
economic shocks and downturns still exhibits its influence on the communities of 
Hull. As with many other cities there are  challenges throu ghout ou r housing stock 
from the legacy  of homes built in th e 1960’s and 1970’s to the grandeur of Victorian 
and Edward ian homes , and whil st there have been  great strides made over the  last 
decades in addressing the  housing  legacy  from programmes aimed at the owner 
occupied and  private rented sectors to the large scale residential and community 
schemes to address  market failure in Gipsyville and  Preston Road for example , there 
is much that still remains  to be done . Shaping our hous ing future in the existing stock 
as well as new build in Kingswood and the city centre is helping to further develop 
Hull as a place to live and create a carbon neutral residential sector.  
Continuing to reshape housing in Hull in the context of climate cha nge provides a 
significant challenge and opportunity to address the built domestic legacy through a 
rapid and extensive expansion in energy efficiency and developing low carbon and 
low cost heating solutions.  
As a port city  Hull has  a set of unique factors  that shape us beyond the maritime 
connectivity.  These result from the movement of freight into and out of the port by 
road, rail and ship and the impact this has on the infrastructure of the city and that of 
                                            
2 ONS TTWA Mid -Year population Estimates 2016  10-V14-FINAL  
 port decarbonisation is primarily seen within a national and international context. 
Therefore, influencing the role and shape of how carbon neutral ports develop and 
operate is a key element of our future . 
Hull is rightly proud of its maritime history,  stretching back 800 years and which 
helped build  the city through trade, fishing and later the importation of coal and 
timber . However,  it is creating a new maritime history based on the key economic 
prize of the 21st Century  the decarbonisation of the economy. The SiemensGamesa 
offshore wind turbine man ufacturing plant  has shown how Hull can transform itself 
for a new industry and the investments by KCOM, RB, Smith and Nephew and C4Di  
for example  demonstrates our leading role in research an d innovation. The expertise 
in the ca ravan industry and construct ion provide the building blocks for development 
and innovation  in modern  methods of construction  for housing development . 
The city centre has seen the public realm along prime shopping streets completely 
refreshed with new water features and innovative lighting to valued buildings and 
spaces. Major residential development is moving  forward and new connections are 
being made to the Ma rina and the Humber Estuary waterfront with a new footbridge 
across the A63. The Old Town has become a focus for new leisure uses, while the 
Fruit Market area hosts the city’s growing tech cluster.   
While Hull is a tightly bounded city with the Humber Estuary to the South and 
measuring  sixteen kilometres by eight kilometres , it makes  a compact and human  
scale city. The city has  all the benefits that an urban area can offer with housin g, 
clustering of industry an d business  with great transport conn ections t o London and 
across th e Pennines to  Manchester  as well as the connections to  Europe . Hull is  
surrounded by a rural and maritime hinter land that provides recreational  health 
benefits  with access  to a rich natural environment that plays a key role in the 
biodiversity of the wider Humber Estuary  and the UK .  
Hull, like the rest of the UK an d the world, is at a cross roads in the journey from a 
place built on a fossil fuel economy to one built on renewable energy  and production 
circularity . Our city has already chosen  its direction  through recent inward investment 
and its 2030 carbon neutral target to instigate the transition to a place able  to take 
full ad vantage of the opportunities an d productivity  benefits derived from carbon 
neutral ba sed place -making.  
Hull is playing a vital role  in leading the carbon neutral change in the Humber as its 
key city , and within the north of England. We are already leading in the offshore wind 
industry powering the UK renewable energy transition, our busine sses are 
generating renewable power themselves  (e.g. Croda an d Aunt Bessies ) and 
providing power  through Energyworks for the UK. Hull has developed, with partners, 
demonstrable  leadership in flood management through the Living with Water 
partnership which  recognises the key geographic challenges Hull faces in 
addressing water abundance and in future periods of water shortage.  
Hull will also play an important role in the emerging need for greater and more 
innovative ways to capture carbon . This will be thro ugh natural systems to sequester 
emissions that cannot be avoided as well as being  a key place for carbon capture  11-V14-FINAL  
 usage  and sto rage (CCUS)  technology for energy intensive industry,  and th e 
emerging  hydrogen economy .  
Hull is place -making for a low carbon f uture that will shape our city  for the rest of the 
century and beyond.  
 
  12-V14-FINAL  
 The Approach  
This strategy  sets out the challenges for Hull, and the pace of change  required , to 
deliver future growth and prosperity  whilst at the same time becoming carbon neutral 
by 2030.  
 
 
Chart 4:  Three actions for Hull Carbon neutrality    
The strategy  is built on eight  key themes that Hull will need to address. Each of 
these themes  sets out the main challenges , targets  and how these can be addressed 
before summarising the programmes of work that could  be take n to enable Hull to 
become a global carbon neutral leader.  
The strategy  is brought together in a summary of the actions  that will be taken over 
the next four years  to begin our journey to being carbon neutral by 2030. T he action  
plan does not set out all that is required over th e next ten years but indicates the first 
steps , which will be complemented by  sector specific roadmaps  that will be 
developed . 
The strategy  and action plan mark the beginning of  a consultation pro cess that will 
be undertaken during 2020/21 .  This will help to define the actions we need to take 
including increasing our understanding of th e challenges , pace and scale of change 
in key sectors an d establishing clear roadmaps to mak e Hull a global leade r as a 
carbo n neutral  city.   
One key and linked element running alongside this strategy  is the need to develop a 
comprehensive Climate Adaptation Strategy . The Adaptation Strategy  will build upon 
the adaptation work the city has already  undertaken around flooding and the ongoing Carbon Neutral 
HullReducing 
Consumption 
Emissions to near zeroReducing Production 
Emissions to near zero
Carbon Sequestration 
to offset remaining 
production and 
consumption 
emissions13-V14-FINAL  
 work in the Living with Water Partnership but will also look to the future impacts of 
heatwaves, extreme weather events, and climate impact assessments across key 
sectors , and to opportunities for innovation in a daptive technologies and services. 
Climate change is happening and needs to be responded to not just by delivering 
carbon neutrality but also through adaptation to a changed climate.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  14-V14-FINAL  
 The Challenge Ahead  
In March 2019 , Hull City Council declared a climate emergency and established a 
target  for Hull to become a carbon neutral economy for both p roduction and 
consumption of emission s by 2030 , joining a global mo vement of local authorities as 
one of over 230 within the UK.    
The UK Government has committed the country to become net zero, for production 
emissions by 2050 and the Committee on Climate  Change has set  out, for 
Government , the pace an d scale  of change  required within the UK if we are to meet 
the 2050  date.  The achieveme nt of a net zero economy by 2050 is considered 
credible and viable with existing known technology and for an annual cost of 1% -2% 
of GDP3. Further, the United Nations Inter -Governmental Panel on Climate Change 
has said that for the world to meet the aims w ithin the Paris Agreement of keeping 
global warming “well below 2oc by 2050” that global emissions need to at least half 
from where they are now in the next ten years.  
The Committee on Climate Change has identified that the transition to a carbon 
neutral economy would deliver significant economic benefits through;  
• Reduction in costs of climate impacts: both at home (e.g. flooding), and 
abroad (e.g. supply chain disruption or migration). Acting i s cheaper 
overall than inaction  
• Industrial and economic compet itiveness: growth in low carbon industries 
has been faster than average economic growth in the UK for some years 
and this is predicted to accelerate. By becoming an early mover in 
products and services related to low carbon electricity production, low 
emis sion vehicles and low carbon financial services, the UK can benefit 
when these are needed by other countries  
• Improved impact on human health: for example, through the uptake of 
active travel, healthier diet s, and air quality improvements  
• Non-monetised bene fits include comfortable homes (e.g. reduced risk of 
heat and cold related deaths), the recreational and biodiversity benefits of 
increased woodland and hedgerow coverage, and reduced flood risk and 
water quality improvements fr om the restoration of peatla nds 
These provide key areas where Hull can increase the co -benefits4 of becoming 
carbon neutral through improvements to health and well -being of its residents, 
creating jobs and increasing productivity.  
 
Climate change, and the response of delivering carbo n neutrality, represents t he 
greatest challenge of our time .  Delivery of carbon neutrality in Hull is not only 
                                            
3 https://www.theccc.org.uk/wp -content/uploads/2019/05/Net -Zero-The-UKs-contribution -to-stopping -
global -warming.pdf  
4 United Nations Sustainable Development Goals 
https://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/sustainable -development -goals/  15-V14-FINAL  
 dependent on actions taken locally, but also the actions of government, supply -
chains and decisions taken internationally.   An integral role of the strategy is to 
undertake, with partners, effective lobbying of Government and other key influencers 
to ensure that the policy and funding models are in place to deliver the changes 
required. A carbon neutral city will require a fundamental change to en sure that the 
children of our city today have a place fit for their children and grandchildren.  
 
What changes do we need to see?  
To deliver the level of decarbonisation required over the next ten years will require 
Hull to generate much of its electricity from renewable energy sources locally, 
making use of our roofs and land inside and outside the city. The way we move in 
and around the city will be significantly different as we walk and cycle more and use 
public transport as we create the infrastructure t o make this the easiest and first 
choice. The public transport (buses and trains), cars,  freight trains,  lorries, boats and 
ships will be powered by electricity and hydrogen. Our homes and offices will be 
more energy efficient and we will use electricity and/or hydrogen to heat and cook 
with.  
 
The Committee on Climate Change says cutting greenhouse gas emis sions to zero 
by 2050  will require these seven changes;  
Petrol and diesel cars banned from sale ideally by 2030 and 2035 at the latest.  
Quadrupling clean electricity production from wind, solar and perhaps nuclear, plus 
batteries to store it and connection s to Europe to share the load.  
Connection of new homes to the gas grid ending in 2025, with boilers using clean 
hydrogen or replaced by electric powered heat pumps. Plus, all homes and 
appliances being highly efficient.  
Beef, lamb and dairy consumption fa lling by 20%, though this is far lower than other 
studies recommend and a bigger shift to plant -based diets would make meeting the 
zero target easier.  
A fifth of all farmland – 15% of the UK – being converted to tree planting and growing 
biofuel crops and restoration of peat bogs. This is vital to take CO2 out of the air to 
balance unavoidable emissions from cattle and planes.  
1.5bn new trees will be needed, meaning more than 150 football pitches a day of 
new forests from now to 2050.  
Flying would not be ba nned, but the number of flights will depend on how much 
airlines can cut emissions with electric planes or biofuels.  
 
We will need to increase energy efficiency in the  way we manufacture goods, 
reusing  heat from processes so we get the most value from it. Develop a circular 16-V14-FINAL  
 economy approach to the design, manufacture and reuse of products and resources 
so we get the most value from them. Switch to different fuels for processes and 
where we need to use carbon based fuels and include carbon capture solutions.  
Hull will have the opportunity to create new products and services required in a 
decarbonised world  that opens the door for innovation for the future and make the 
most of the skills and talent of t he people of Hull and those who  will come and live 
here in the future. Hull will need to ensure that residents currently employed in 
carbon intensive jobs can retain their employment as we transition to carbon 
neutrality and that we reskill them for the new jobs and services required.  
One of the biggest changes though lies within each of us as we will need to change 
our behaviour in the choices we make in how we travel, food we consume, use 
energy within our homes and workplaces , and what we choose to spend our money 
on. All of the decis ions we make have an impact on the environment of our great city 
and through our choices we will shape its future.  
All organisations in the city whether public or private sector, will need to use the ir 
skills and talent to deliver the transition to carbon neutrality.  Larger organisations will 
be able to use their buying power to support the transition across the wider 
economy, enabling smaller and medium enterprises that make up the majority of 
employers in our city to build on the benefits.  
Despite signif icant economic growth in Hull  over the last decade there is still a large 
propo rtion of the population of the c ity that are distanced from a positive experience 
of work and wider life chances. A carbon neutral Hull needs to address this issue of 
fairness a nd ensure that experiences such as fuel poverty are effectively redressed.  
Analysis undertaken for Hull by the University of Leeds has identified some of the 
steps  that are both cost effective and technically viable that  can be taken that will be 
the most carbon effective (Chart 5)  and cost effective  (Chart 6)  in delivering carbon 
reduction . 
 
17-V14-FINAL  
 Chart 5: Most Carbon Effective carbon reduction actions  
 
 
Chart 5: Most C ost Effective carbon reduction actions  
 
Change on this scale will require Hull to deliver , over the next ten years,  a pace of 
carbon reduction that it has not been achieved to date.  
 
What is carbon neutral  and what is the difference between production 
and consumption emissions ?  
Being carbon neutral, also referred to a s “net zero” , mean s that as a society and 
economy we  need to transition  to a future without fossil fuels , reduce the emissions 
produced by burning and using fossil fuels  to almost zero. To achieve these , 
changes will need to be made to  how we travel, heat and power our homes  and work 
places, and how  manufacture d goods and food grow n do not  release avoidable 
carbon dioxide , and other greenhouse gases , into the atmosphere that are at the 
heart of man -made climate change.   
The 2030 carbon neutral target covers both the production and consumption of 
carbon emissions  (Chart 7) .  
 
18-V14-FINAL  
  
Chart 7 : Production and Consumption emissions5 
 
Production : emissions produced from products and services we use in  the city  
Consumption : emissions created in the manufacture and creation of go ods and 
services, also sometimes re ferred to as embedded emissions  
Production emissions are always created within the city, but as consumption 
emissions are often created outside of the city they are more difficult to identify and 
control without focussed attention on supply chains and national, or international, 
government policy decisions .  
Reducing emissions by improving home insulation will reduce the amount of 
production emissions as we need to burn  gas to keep warm in our homes .  However, 
the emission s created when the insulation material is manufactured may increase 
consumption emissions.   Ending the use of  fossil fuels  such as oil , gas, petrol and 
diesel and significant reduction of  the products  we use that ar e made from oil such 
as plastics and fertilizers  as well as dietary changes , will reduce both production and 
consumption emissions .  
However, it is not possible to  completely stop the use of fossil fuels as these will still 
be a requirement for some industrial processes or specialist products . Therefore, 
once we have reduced and limited the release of carbon dioxide and other 
greenhouse gas emissions with ren ewable energy, battery storage and bio -based 
                                            
5 https://www.vox.com/energy -and-environment/2019/7/1/18743992/climate -change -cities -food-cars-
emissions  
19-V14-FINAL  
 plastics and natural fertilizer growing systems , there will still be  some emissions 
remainin g.  
The final step to carbon neutrality w ill be through carbon sequestration either through 
natural solutions such as tree planting and habitat creation  for wildlife and plants and 
technical solutions like  carbon capture and storage.  
What have we achieved so far?  
Production  
Analysis undertaken by the University of Leeds6  covering  Scope 1 and 27 emissions 
only shows that Hull’s baseline (scope 1 and 2) emissions have fallen by 44% since 
20058, due to a combination of increasingly decarbonised electricity supply, 
structural change in the economy, and the gradual adoption of more efficient 
buildings, vehicles and businesses  (Chart 8) .  
With full decarbonisation of UK electricity by 2045, and taking into account economic 
growth (assumed at 2.5% p.a.), populat ion growth (assumed at 0.1% p.a.) and on -
going improvements in energy and fuel efficiency (assumed at 1% p.a) , the analysis 
projects  that Hull’s baseline (scope 1 and 2) emissions will fall by a further 26% by 
2050, or by a total of 58% between 2005 and 20 50.  
Scope 3  emissions or consumption based emissions, discussed below, are those 
associated with the goods and services that are produced elsewhere but imported 
and consumed within the area, after taking into account the carbon footprint of any 
goods and services produced in the area, but that are exported and consumed 
elsewhere.  
 
                                            
6 Gouldson, A. Sudmant, A. Duncan, A. (2019). “A summary carbon roadmap for Hull City Council”. 
Place -based Climate Action Network, https://pcancities.org.uk/  
7 Scope 1 covers emissions from fuel (e.g. petrol, diesel or gas) directly use d within an area and from 
other sources such as landfill sites or industry within the area.  Scope 2 covers emissions from 
electricity that is used within the area, even if it is generated somewhere else.  
8 2005: 2,156 kilotons of carbon emissions  20-V14-FINAL  
   
Chart 8:  Scope 1 and 2 GHG emissions 2005 to 2050 for Hull  
 
Currently, 22% of Hull’s emissions come from the transport sector, with housing then 
responsible for 28% of emissio ns, public and commercial buildings for 29% and 
industry 21 %. By 2050, the analysis  project s emissions from transport and housing 
will increase with a small decrease in the proportion of emissions from 
public/commercial buildings and industry  (Chart 9) . 
 
 
 
Chart 9: Emissions by sector  
 
05001000150020002500kt	CO2e
Business	as	Usual	Baseline	(Historic) Business	as	Usual	Baseline	(Projected)GHG	emissions	fell	
44%	2005	to	2019
GHG	emissions	are	projected	
to	fall	26%	2019	to	2050
GHG	emissions	are	projected	
to	fall	58%	2005	to	2050
21-V14-FINAL  
 Nationally the sources of carbon emissions , Chart 10 , show  that there has been a 
clear difference in how sectors within the economy have either started to 
decarbonise or have seen emissions grow. Emissions for Hull reflect t his national 
progress and demonstrates that some of the issues will require national policy 
intervention and investment to deliver change.  
 
Chart 10 : Progress reduction emissions has been imbalanced  in the UK9 
Consumption  
Consumption emissions are more difficult to calculate and Hull has not looked at this 
area of emissions previously .  New research has been commissioned to establish 
the baseline position which will enable measure ment up to 2030. The research, 
undertaken by  Anthesis , has identified that Hull’s consumption emissions generate 
1.8 times more than the cities production emissions  and emanate primarily from six 
sectors , Chart 11 . 
                                            
9 BEIS (2019) Final UK greenhouse gas emissions national statistics 1990 -2017; CCC analysis. 
LULUCF = land use, land use change and forestry.  
22-V14-FINAL  
  
Chart 11: Hull Consumption Emissions by Sector  
The inclusion of consumption emissi on with in the carbon neutral target for Hull 
presents a new set of challenges  and opportunities . Over  the next two years further 
assessment will need to be undertaken into consumption emission to enable the 
development of appropriate methods for recording these emissions more frequently 
and developing consumption carbon emission reduction actions.  
Sequestration  
Work is required over th e coming year to understand th e current carbon 
sequ estration benefit offered by th e existing trees an d habitats in Hull and therefore 
understand th e requirements  to ensure that these ar e maintaine d in a carbon  
sequestration and biodiversity enrichment way.  
Analysis for the Humber L ocal Enterprise Partnership (LEP)  identified  that the 
Humber four authority land areas have a current established sequestration benefit of 
600k tCO2e/yr10, excluding the net emissions from a griculture of around 
2,900ktCO2e with a total sequestration potential of 2,000k tCO2e/yr  using 21% of the 
current land available.   
The tree s planted in the current tr ee planting season are estimate d to offer a 
sequestration benefit of circa 656 tonnes of car bon sequestrated over their 45 year 
life11. 
Further work will need to be undertaken to accurately assess the annual natural 
sequestration requirements for Hull to meet the 2030 target and to offset the annual 
future emissions post 2030 in perpetuity of approximately 5% of 2005 emissions .  
 
                                            
10 Humber and the net zero carbon ambition - ARUP 2019 unpublished paper  
11 Growing trees to sequester carbon in the UK: ans wers to some common questions M.G.R. Cannell 
Institute of Terrestrial Ecology Penicuik Scotland.  Based on figures for a wild cherry tree  
23-V14-FINAL  
 Becoming Carbon Neutral by  2030  
 
The Inter -governmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) has argued that from 
2020, keeping within  a global carbon budget of 344 ,000,000kt  of Greenhouse Gas 
(GHG) emissions would provide the world with a 66% chance of limiting average 
warming to 1.5 degrees and therefore avoiding dangerous levels of climate change. 
Dividing the global figure up on an e qual basis by population, will give Hull a total 
carbon budget of 10, 400kt from 2020  for the period through to 2050 and then for 
emissions to be zero hereafter .  
Therefore, using the national 2050 net zero target date, which is the date that current 
Govern ment policy and funding is focused upon achieving, at  current rates  of carbon 
emissions , Hull would use up its 10,400kt budget in just over 9 years. However, Hull 
could stay within this carbon budget by reducing  emissions by 7.7% year on year  to 
become car bon neutral by 2050 . This would mean that Hull commits to transition 
from the  current position where  emissions are 44% lower than 20 05 levels to a 
pathway where Hulls  emissions are 66% lower than 2005 levels by 2025, 77% by 
2030, 85% by 2035, 90% by 2040, 93% by 2045 and 95% by 2050. Such a trajectory 
would mean that the majority of all carbon cuts need to be delivered in the next ten 
years  (Chart 12) . 
 
 
Chart 12:  BAU and science -based emissions pathways  
Therefore to meet the target for Hull to become  carbon neutral by 2030, 95% of 
carbon emissions cut with 5% offset through natural sequestration  by 2030 , will 
require an annual reduction of over 10% per year.  
 05001000150020002500
2005
2007
2009
2011
2013
2015
2017
2019
2021
2023
2025
2027
2029
2031
2033
2035
2037
2039
2041
2043
2045
2047
2049kt CO2e
Local BAU Baseline Science-based pathway24-V14-FINAL  
 Carbon budgets establish the amount of carbon reduction required to achieve 
neutrality by mak ing use of the best scientific knowledge and technologies.   A carbon 
budget approach looks at the total amount of carbon “available” to a place that can 
be emitted to ensure it makes its proportionate contribution to national carbon 
emissions.  
The Climate  Change Act established the use of carbon budgets as the primary 
method of calculating cumulative carbon emissions that affect the climate rather than 
a target linked to a specific date which could lead to larger amounts of carbon being 
emitted over the lo nger term.  
In order to adopt a carbon budget approach , centred on carbon neutrality by 2030 , 
more detailed analysis will be required to help understand the different work needed 
in each sector so that clear carbon neutral roadmaps are able to be produced for 
Hull to stay within the carbon budgets for production emissions.  
The use of carbon budgets is not incompatible with the 2030 carbon neutral target, 
and the roadmap work will include an assessment of the carbon budget to meet the  
2030 carbon neutral target for production emissions. A budget for consumption 
emissions  will be a lot harder to c reate as the embedded emissions, often generated 
outside of the UK, will be subject to decarbonisation plans and progress outside of 
the contr ol of the Council and UK G overnment.    
The chapters below, which look at the key decarbonisation areas and issues, 
identifies not only the activity that will need to be undertaken by the public and 
business sectors but also the areas where Hull will lobby Government for policy and 
funding clarity. These lobbying areas are in line with most of the recommendations 
made by the Committee on Climate Change in their Net Zero Report12.  
 
The Opportunity  
Achieving carbon neutrality requires  commitment and joint wor king across Hull by its 
public, private and voluntary sectors, residents , visitors and inward investors. This 
needs to be supported by a  clear policy direction and funding by Government in 
areas where the City requires  national infrastructure  changes , for example in heat 
decarbonisation and the growth of electricity and hydrogen in the transport sectors. 
Hull can only progress so far towards being carbon neutral by 2030 before key 
national structural economic changes are in place.  
Considering the carbon red uction gap, Chart 12, between the businesses  as usual 
emissions and achieving an earlier carbon neutral target there are three areas  of 
carbon reduction .  Activities which are cost effective and therefore pay for 
themselves in the short term, technical potential options  which are available today 
but may not pay for themselves directly but provide wider social benefits. The final 
category are those actions which can be defined as innovative which include low 
                                            
12 https://www.theccc.org.uk/wp -content/uploads/2019/05/Net -Zero-The-UKs-contribution -to-stopping -
global -warming.pdf  25-V14-FINAL  
 carbon solutions which are currently not adopte d widely or require further technical 
or deployment assessment.   
The analysis by the University of Leeds p redicts that the gap between  Hull’s 
business as  usual emissions in 2050 and a 2050  net zero target could be closed by 
32% through the adoption of cos t-effective options and 53% through the adoption of 
both the cost -effective and technically viable options. Therefore, there would still a 
need to identify  innovative options that could deliver the last 47% of the gap between 
the businesses as usual scenar io and 2050 net zero  (Chart 13) .  
 
  
Chart 13 : Baseline with the contributions of cost -effective, technical potential and stretch 
options  
The analysis has identified that undertaking the only the costs effective options 
would require investment of £535 million, and that once adopted these could reduce 
Hull’s total energy bill by £78 million p.a. and create  1,149 years of employment.  
The challenge ahead , therefore, presents a major  opportunity for Hull to position its 
businesses ; commercial, manufac turing and service , to be at the forefront  of a 
decarbonised future and increase productivity , innovation  and grow th. Hull has the 
ability to  support the creation of skills an d training  opportunities for residents  to take 
advantage of the future nature of work and the areas of growth and ensure that an 
effective transition  takes place  economically and socially.  
Hull has demonstrated over the last five years that it has the skills  and inward 
investment  infrastructure to meet the future challenges . The devel opment of th e 
SiemensGamesa wind turbine factory has shown that our residents  have the 
qualities to meet fully the challenges of a new industry that is key to the City and the 
UK decarbonising. Local businesses an d the Council  have demonstrated that th ey 
are able to reduce  energy use and innovate in manufacturing and services to 
increase resource efficiency  and deliver growth.  
05001000150020002500
2005
2007
2009
2011
2013
2015
2017
2019
2021
2023
2025
2027
2029
2031
2033
2035
2037
2039
2041
2043
2045
2047
2049ktCO2e
Stretch	options Technical	potential Cost	effective
BAU	Baseline Science	based	pathway26-V14-FINAL  
 Nationally , the Committee on Climate Change  set out  the carbon reduction 
measures across a set of core and ambitious areas. Core mea sures include no new 
homes heated by natural gas from 2025, significant roll out of low carbon power an d 
electric vehicles , increased diversion of waste from landfill, a massive increase in 
tree planting, the roll out of low carbon heating and carbon captu re and storage.  
Ambitious areas of work cover the establishment of a hydrogen economy providing 
heating, peak power and fuel for trains,  HGV’s and shipping, increased expansion  of 
carbon capture and use, reduction in meat consumption of 20% and even greate r 
reforestation. These actions , it is predicted , would deliver a 96% carbon reduction by 
2050.  
The challenge before us though requires change that goes further and deeper than 
we have achieved  to date and requires greater levels of partnership working, 
innovation and skills acquisition. More so than before, we are setting the 
infrastructure economically , socially an d environmentally that will determine the 
future for Hull . 
The chapters that follow set out the detail of th e changes  required in key areas and 
the contribution that can be made by the public sector, businesses and residents  
together these will enable Hull to be in the right position to meet its target.  
 
Wider benefits of decarbonisat ion 
Becoming carbon neutral over the next ten years has the potential to deliver 
significant co -benefits for the city that will address many of the other challenges we 
face.  Delivering carbon  neutrality , particularly in the transport sector , will have a 
significant  impact  on air quality  for Hull , a known cause of ill health and reduced  life 
expectancy, with children being particularly vulnerable. The increased provision  and 
attractiveness  of more sustainable travel choices has th e potential to increase act ive 
travel an d lifestyles which again is known to reduce years of ill health and increase 
years of active health . Rapid progression to carbon neutrality  will make a significant 
contribution to the impacts  of climate change  and the severity and frequency of 
extreme weather events.  
 
  27-V14-FINAL  
 Energy : Heat  
Challenge  
 Increase all home energy performance to a minimum of EPC C rating  
 Decarbonise space heating in buildings across all sectors  
 Decarbonise heat for industrial processes  
 Capture and reuse waste heat  
 Ensuring all biodegradable waste is used for anaerobic digestion  
 
The decarbonisation of heat in the domestic and industrial process areas presents 
the greatest  challenge in the city’s  ambition to become carbon neutral by 2030. The 
scale of the challenge is stark with domestic  gas consumption of  1,340GWh and 
1,012GWh in the non -domestic  sector in 2017 the majority of which was used for 
heating and industrial processes . 
The decarbonisation of heat will require key national infrast ructure decisions  and 
investment to stimulate and en able private sector investment and  significant change s 
to how we heat our homes an d buildings  and undertake industrial processes.  Hull 
cannot deliver this change without Government intervention.  While the Government 
is proposing to require all new homes built after 2025 will not be connected to the 
gas network , and new homes energy efficiency will meet the Future Homes 
Standard, this does not affect the 95% of homes that will be around in 2050 th at 
have already been built.  
The decarbonisation of heat  also repre sents a key area where the fair  transition to a 
carbon neutral future, discussed  further below , needs to be considered  so that fuel 
poverty and business stability is addressed.  
Hull through its compact scale and its digital platform allows for the intelligent control 
of resources through smart home technology building upon current heating 
applications as Nest and Tado.  
Hull is well placed to deliver one of the key elements of heat decarbonisa tion and 
that is to reduce heat loss and waste heat. The most effective way to decarbonise 
heat is through large scale energy  efficiency  improvements  to all homes  across the 
city so that they all meet an EPC13 C rating or higher  and an equivalent DEC14 rating 
for non -domestic premises . The Council, businesses and other organisations have 
been undertaking this work for a long time and delivering significant improvements in 
people’s lives as a result and the 2030 carbon neutral target now requires that the 
pace  and scale of this work needs to increase significantly.  
                                            
13 Energy Performance Certificate  
14 Display Energy Certificate  28-V14-FINAL  
 The required inc rease in property energy efficiency  requires significant  additional 
investment and support from Government to enable the Council, private landlords, 
Housing Associations and individua ls to increase the current pace of improvement.  
Housing ESWI case study  
The Housing service has undertaken significant work to improve the thermal 
efficiency of homes in the private and public sectors that are hard to treat through 
traditional cavity wall  insulation through the use of external solid wall insulation. In 
total over 1,000 private homes and 1,600 council own homes have been improved, 
with future planned schemes improving another 117 private and 546 council homes 
with an investment in excess of  £18m.  
Reducing the need for heating through insulation directly impacts the need for new 
infrastructure required for low carbon heating.  
Within the industrial process area there is also the opportunity to increase the reuse 
of waste heat as a by -product of a process either within the business itself or through 
the transfer of the heat to adjacent potential users either as direct heat or as hot 
water.  The Hull district heating network currently in the detailed design phase aims to 
deliver low carbon heatin g to Hull’s city centre, initially, with the aim to use waste 
heat, and in the future hydrogen, to provide heating and hot water.  
Hull will need to move away from  the use of natural gas as  the primary fuel for 
heating and cooking in  homes and fo r industria l processes. In the domestic, retail 
and office  sector s this will need to be replaced through either electric  or hydrogen 
heating . A full electric conversion  will require a significant increase in th e generation  
of renewable energy and the installation  of new infrastructure  in the city to homes 
and businesses as well as replacing  existing gas radiators  with modern electric 
systems  such as  air source heat pumps or low temperature radiators in existing 
homes an d underfloor heating systems  in new homes . This w ill also require a 
significant increase in home fabric thermal performance and energy efficiency  
Hydrogen , currently being  developed through project s such as H2115 and 
HyDeploy16, which the Council is involved in, envisage s hydrogen replacing natural 
gas in homes and offices for heating and hot water, with either hydrogen or electricity 
used for cooking.  
A number of industrial processes in Hull use natural gas to enable the manufacture 
of products and the use of  hydrogen provides the only realistic alternative.  To 
generate enough hydrogen to meet our heating and industrial needs would  requi re 
an increase to th e production  of 8 million tonnes a year from the current 0.74 million 
tonnes17.  
                                            
15 H21 is a collaboration between Hull and Leeds Councils, Teeside, Northern Gas Networks to 
assess the development of a hydrogen infrastructure to homes and businesses.  
16 HyDeploy is a collaborat ion between Cadent, Northern Gas Network’s, ITM Power, Keele University 
and Progressive Energy to assess the use of hydrogen for heating and cooking within the home  
17 https://www.newscientist.com/article/2206546 -uk-could -use-hydrogen -instead -of-natural -gas-if-it-
can-make -enough/  14th June 2019  29-V14-FINAL  
 The production of hydrog en either through the process of removing it from natural  
gas or steam methane reforming generates significant  amounts of carbon dioxide. 
Therefore, the development of hydrogen as a viable carbon neutral heating  solution 
requires the use of CCUS . CCUS proc esses  capture  the carbon at the point of th e 
production and transports  it through underground pipeline for storage in empty  oil 
and gas wells in th e southern North Sea , under current proposals18. The 
development of the  hydrogen economy , with the right natio nal policy framework  and 
funding, would be in a position to commence conversion of homes and businesses in 
the late 2020’s with current modelling indicating that Hull alongside other northern 
cities , could be converted to hydrogen in the mid  to late  2030’s19.  
As we move forward there is the opportunity to generate blue hydrogen generated 
from the use of renewable energy to create hydrogen from electrolysis. The 
Gigastack20 Project between Orsted, ITM Power, Phillips 66 and Element Energy is 
aiming to scale u p blue hydrogen capability to reach 20MW electrolysis systems that 
are scalable in the near future. This would avoid or significantly reduce the need for 
CCUS over the century.  
There are also opportunities to  derive heat through wat er and ground source heat as 
well as solar water heating systems and developing new community renewable 
energy systems  and these need to be explored further over the next few years . 
The decarbonisation of heat will require reskilling of existing business i n the natural 
gas sector as well as opportunities for growth in the insulation and heat efficiency 
sector and opportunities , to generate new products and services and innovation.  
 
Carbon Neutral Heat Pathway Summary  
Council  
 Build low carbon Maritime Project new visitor centre  
 Undertake Local Energy Area Energy Assessment for domestic heat 
decarbonisation  
 Develop community based sustainable heat solutions  
 Take a leading role in the development of a hydrogen economy  
 Operational district heating network  covering the city centre and regeneration sites  
Public Sector  
 Take steps to insulate buildings and reduce heat loss  
 Support heat efficiency through procurement contracts  
 Provide support to supply chain  to reduce heat loss.  
 Understand heat decarbonisation  implications for sites  
Business  
 Take steps to increase the energy efficiency of your property through advice from 
the Energy Savings Trust business pages  
 Understand how heat decarbonisation will affect your business  
 Identify opportunities for new product s and services you could develop  
Government  Support Required  
 Increase funding and mechanisms for energy efficiency work in all homes  
                                            
18 https://www.h21.green/  
19 https://www.h21.green/  
20 https://www.gigastack.co.uk   30-V14-FINAL  
  Provide clear policy direction and funding for heat decarbonisation including the 
future of R enewable Heat Incentive  
 Provide funding for local authorities to undertaken Local Energy Planning  
 Provide greater support for businesses in heat efficiency  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 31-V14-FINAL  
 Energy: Power  
Challenge  
 Significantly increase  renewable energy generation and storage   
 Increase  local energy security  
 Develop community ownership of energy generation and storage  
 Develop smart energy  system solutions  
 Reduce the amount of wasted energy in the City  
 
Hull already has over 23MW21 of renewable energy installed generating over 
27,000MWh o f energy each year. However, to meet the carbon neutral target  these 
figures will need to increase significantly to make a meaningful local contribution to 
decarbonisation  in Hull . In 2017 , the domestic sector consumed 370GWh and non -
domestic sector consum ed 711GWh of electricity  all of which will need to be 
delivered through carbon neutral sources by 2030 to meet our target.  
 
 Photovoltaic  Onshore 
Wind  Anaerobic 
Digestion  Plant 
biomass  Total  
(MW)  
2014  7.3 0 0.9 1 9.2 
2015  11.1 0.1 0.9 0.1 13 
2016  21.7 0.1 0.1 0.1 23.6 
2017  22 0.1 0.9 1 23.9 
Table 3: MW installed capacity in Hull22 
 
 Photovoltaic  Onshore 
Wind  Anaerobic 
Digestion  Plant 
biomass  Total  
(MWh)  
2014  5,958  90 3,101  5,446  8,637  
2015  7,929  140 2,766  6,939  17,774  
2016  14,977  111 3,312  4,940  23,340  
2017  19,741  125 2,768  4,857  27,491  
Table 4: MWh generated in Hull23 
 
The national  decarbonisation of the electricity  grid will deliver the step change 
required in carbon neutral electricity  and the offshore wind energy market, of which 
Hull plays such a  crucial part, is at the heart of the solution , predicted to provide 
                                            
21 A MW (megawatt) is a measure of power and is the “ra te” of energy transfer and a MWh (megawatt 
hour) is the flow of that energy over an hour.  
22 https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/regional -renewable -statistics  
23 https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/regional -renewable -statistics  32-V14-FINAL  
 30GW by 203024. However , there  are significant opportunities  within  Hull to generate 
renewable energy from wind turbines an d primarily  the growth in roof top solar,  
particularly on large  industrial  premises and office accommodation  as well as 
domestic roof tops . There  are also opportunities to install solar canopies  on surface 
car parks  to generate power for electric  vehicle  charging  as well as shading of 
vehicles.  
 
Solar power gene ration car park canopy : BRE.co.uk  
 
Hull’s growth of renewables industries can be supported  through  city wide 
procurement frameworks  and the creation of community energy bonds to increase 
local investment and ownership of a carbon neutral future.  
Alongside the development of increased renewable  energy generation will be the 
need for increased storage capacity to make the most of generation peaks. 
Renewable energy storage either through  batteries, heat or gas will need to be 
developed significantly and has th e potential  to contribute to the hydrogen economy 
through  the generation  of green hydrogen. Battery storage will need to be developed 
at the grid, community and domestic  scale , and utilise the opportunities  of electric  
vehicle  batteries as part of a smart power grid system.  
As with the heat, discussed above, there are still opportunities to reduce  the 
unnecessary waste of electricity  through  inefficient equipment an d processes . There 
is also m uch that can still be done to reduce  energy  use and costs through  carbon  
neutral behaviour.  
The development of energy saving tec hnology as well as improving th e efficiency  
and effectiveness  of renewable  and storage technologies provide s significant 
                                            
24 https://eandt.thei et.org/content/articles/2019/09/massive -seabed -auction -could -double -uk-s-
offshore -wind-power/  
33-V14-FINAL  
 opportunities for innovation in  product  and service development.  The de velopment 
of community energy systems  linked to energy efficiency  can reduce  the costs of 
energy in the domestic sector and create new approaches to smart energy systems.   
Water is part of th e energy system through the tidal flow of the Humber E stuary and 
the River Hull, the heat containe d in the water that can be extracted through  water 
source heat pumps , and the pumping an d processing of cl ean an d dirty water. The 
effective use an d movemen t of water has a lar ge impact on the energy requirement s. 
There is still much that can be done to both reduce the energy impact of water as 
well as extract the energy benefit.  
 
Carbon Neutral Power Pathway Summary  
Council  
 Move to a green tariff for electricity  
 Increase renewable energy generation and storage on buildings  and land  
 Undertaken deep energy retrofit of buildings  
 Provide targeted advice to business on energy efficiency  
 Work with Northern Powergrid on distributive energy systems  
Public Sector  
 Move to a green tariff for electricity  
 Install  renewable energy and storage  
 Undertake deep  energy efficiency in buildings  
 Develop good energy behaviours amongst staff  
 Deliver energy savings through procurement  
 Explore funding models for cross sector renewable energy  
Business  
 Move to a green tariff for electricity  
 Invest in renewable energy and storage  
 Understand the impact and opportunitie s of decarbonised power to your business  
 Support staff to use energy wisely  
Government  Support Required  
 Maintain support for offshore wind  
 Relax planning restric tions to increase on shore wind development  
 Develop solar PV with battery storage incentives for business  and community 
sector  
 Facilitate distributed power networks and integration  
 
 
 
 
  34-V14-FINAL  
 Mobility  
Challenge  
 Enable a major shift to sustainable travel  
 Deliver an electric vehicle infrastructure in particular for properties without off 
street parking  
 Develop a hydrogen transport infrastructure for road, rail and shipping  
 
To meet the 2030 carbon neutral target we need to look more closely at what 
options/  alternatives are available for  moving people, services and goods around, 
into and out of Hull. This consideration will help Hull  focus not on the mode of 
transport initially but on the issue of mobility as transport is just the “vehicle”, it is 
sustainabl e mobility that we want to provide that moves people and goods in the 
most effective way , Chart 7 .  
 
 
Chart 7: Hull Modes of Transport: Census 2011  
 
The decarbonisation of transport will require a mobility system that actively supports 
and enables sustain able travel a s a priority with all of the associated benefits that a 
more sustainable , environmentally beneficial and  healthier mobility solution can 
provide including better air quality delivering a reduction in years of ill -health  and an 
increase in years of active life.  
To achieve carbon neutrality for existing mobility choices the city needs to do two 
things, firstly, increase the availability and attractiveness of sustainable travel 
choices, walking, cycling and public transport and secondly increase the use of zero 
carbon emission transport  through the use of  electric and hydrogen  powered 
vehicles . 
Hull will need to take steps to increase the use of walking, cycling and public 
transport through building new infrastructure to supp ort their growth and influencing 
35-V14-FINAL  
 modal choice through putting in place appropriate levers based around 
time/cost/quality interplay to enable these to become attractive and practical choices.  
For improvements in the rail infrastructure further engagement w ill be required with  
Government / Network Rail and Transport for the North  over the electrification of the 
main rail line to Hull . Support will also be sought from Government towards 
improvements to  port infrastructure and services for decarbonisation.  
The Government has set a national target for a ban on the sale of non -hybrid petrol 
and diesel cars from 2040 with the aim of accelerating the increase in  the uptake in 
the purchase of electric vehicles. As the Committee on  Climate Change have stated 
the date needs to be brou ght forward to hasten this  transition. Hull will lobby for this 
change to support its 2030 carbon neutral target.  
Chart 8 highlights the growth in the  number of charge points installed in HU postcode 
area is growing including those availab le to the public25. The Council is increasing 
the number it has available at its car parks for the public to use as well as those for 
its own fleet . Businesses and organisations in Hull are also cumaking the move to 
electric vehicles for their fleets, custo mers and staff.  
 
 
Chart 8: Electric vehicle Chargepoint Installations HU Postcodes: Northern Powergrid 
notified installations.  
 
The development of charging infrastructure for existing homes is currently being 
explored and solutions to enable charging for  residents without off -street parking will 
develop over the next few years. This  will require significant investment in charging 
points as well as strengthening the capacity of the electricity network to provide the 
power  requirements . Hull has over 8,00026 properties which have no off street 
parking provision and therefore Hull will develop an approach to address how 
                                            
25 https://www.zap -map.com/live/  
26 2011 Census number of terraced properties with at least one car  30354045505560657075
2016 2017 2018Electric Vehcile Chargepoint Installations:
HU postcode36-V14-FINAL  
 charging facilities can be introduced to serve this type of property and feed this into 
Government so that policy, funding and business models  can be developed  to 
address this situation . 
At present there are no commercially available carbon neutral solutions for heavy 
goods vehicles, freight trains or shipping. The solution , being developed,  for these 
modes of transport  is based on hydrogen fuel  cell technology but in the short -term 
the market is moving towards increased use of low carbon fuels notably for rail and 
shipping sectors with the potential in the shipping sector for the use of on -shore 
electric connection while berthed  to run the ships  systems. Through a ddressing the 
challenges with the availability of hydrogen as a fuel for heating, as previously 
discussed, this will enable the development of a hydrogen transport fuel 
infrastructure. However, there are smaller scale hydrogen production  solutions that 
can provide a stimulus to the transport sector in particular for heavy goods vehicles , 
and the Council is working with the Transport Systems Catapult on these 
approaches.  
As a major maritime city , the decarbonisation of shipping and port a ctivity is part of 
our future maritime legacy . While shipping decarbonisation is addressed 
internationally through the International Maritime Organisation there is the 
opportunity to work with international partner  ports in the North Sea to develop 
collect ive approaches to support decarbonisation of ports and shipping.  
 
Carbon neutral Mobility Pathway Summary  
Council  
 Electrification of fleet vehicles including pool vehicles  
 Support the development of public electric charging infrastructure  
 Increase sustainable travel across the city  for commuting and business travel  
 Support the development of electric and hydrogen transport and infrastructure  
 Work with the Port of Hull and businesses on carbon neutral opportunities  
Public Sector  
 Replace fleet vehicles with electric alternatives  
 Provide electric charging infrastructure for staff at work  
 Incentivise sustainable travel amongst staff for commuting and b usiness travel  
Business  
 Replace fleet vehicles with electric  and low emission  alternatives  
 Provi de charging infrastructure for staff at work  
 Support sustainable travel for staff and smart working  
 Assess impacts of carbon neutral transport on own operations and supply chain  
 Identify growth and innovation potential  in carbon neutral transport and 
infrastructure  
Government  
 Accelerate the date for the ban on the sale of non -hybrid and electric cars forward  
 Increase support for hydrogen fuel infrastructure  for road, rail and shipping  
 Provide funding for hydrogen heavy  goods vehicles  
 Provide funding for the electrification of the main rail line into Hull  
 37-V14-FINAL  
 Consumption  
Challenge  
 Embedding  a circular economy approach within the economy and supply 
chain  
 Significantly r educe the amount of food waste  and develop a more plant 
based diet  
 Understand and reduce the embedded carbon in development and purchases  
 Increase understanding of consumption derived emissions to drive design and 
production innovation  
 
The need to reduce consumption emissions alongside production emissions 
presents a significant challenge to all cities .  
Hull’s consumption emissions , based on an initial estimate, amount  to an additional 
2,600 ktCO2e or 1.8 times27 the production  emissions for Hull , although there will be 
some double counting between production and consumption emissions28 and is 
subject to further analysis over the coming months.   
 
Chart 9: Hull Consumption Emissions by Sector  
 
The eight  areas identified  in Chart 9 represent the majority of consumption emissions 
with manufacturing covering 57%, transport and storage 13%, Agriculture, mining 
and utilities  10% and construction 6%.  
                                            
27 Hull Consumptions Emissions Assessment: September 2019 Anthesis  
28 A report produced by Anthesis on the consumption emissions of the city is available at 
www.hullcc.gov.uk   
38-V14-FINAL  
 This new understanding of Hull’s consumption  emissions provides clear focus of the 
areas where reso urces will need to be directed to impact upon this area of 
emissions.  
Manufacturing covers some of the largest  employers in Hull covering 18,000 
employees and 15% of the workforce  and presents a  key area of the local economy 
where there are significant  opportunities  for business to work together on carbon 
emissions  reduction and develop ing the skills within the economy on sector based 
consumption emission reduction. This can also support the development of 
knowledge and skills sharing on carbon reduction th rough supply chains.   
RB for example have a leading approach to their emissions reduc tion and ar e 
committed to setting  a science based carbon  target  and engaging  with all of their 
supply chain to understand  the full extent of the carbon  impact of their businesses.  
The report undertaken by Anthesis provides significant  insight into the  consumption 
emissions and therefore areas where  work can be developed over the coming years.  
While much of the action around consumption emissions will nee d to take place  
through increasing awareness and knowledge within the public and private sector 
businesses, there are also community scale opportunities.  
There are opportunities also to deliver consumption emission reduction alongside 
other projects throug h the achievement of co -benefits. The development of local 
projects around issues such as food poverty and food waste reduction have a direct 
link into addressing consumption emissions within  Hull derived from the agricultural 
sector.   
Hull Food Partnershi p 
The Hull Food Partnership was formed in 2017 with the aim of promoting sustainable 
food principles across the city. Managed by a multi sector steering group with 
representation from Economic Regeneration and Public Health, the partnership has 
over 40 mem bers, from large organisations such as Wilberforce College, to 
independent food outlets and community centres. In June 2019 the Hull Food 
Partnership achieved the nationally accredited Sustainable Food City Bronze Award 
for Hull after submitting evidence o f sustainable food approaches in Hull and an 
action plan for future priorities.  
The partnership works with organisations and communities across the city to 
address climate change by promoting a vibrant local food economy and local food 
production, also ac cess to heathy food and tackling food inequality.  The ethos of the 
partnership is to encourage individual and corporate sustainable food choices that 
reduce food miles, reduce food waste, and support the local food economy.     
 
An important approach to u nderstanding the consumption emissions in production 
and development is through an assessment of the embedded carbon. The 
Environment Agency undertake embedded carbon analysis of flood defence 
investment to help them meet their 2030 carbon neutral target. This clear 39-V14-FINAL  
 understanding links through exploring how carbon can be reduced in the 
development and specification process as well as identifying opportunities to offset 
or sequestrate the carbon emissions that cannot be avoided. This also enables the 
Environ ment Agency to deliver  co-benefits around natural flood systems and habitat 
creation and restoration.  
 
Carbon Neutral Consumption P athway Summary  
Council  
 Undertake embedded carbon analysis of construction projects  
 Increase understanding of organisations consumption emissions and reduction 
approach through procurement  
 Understand scope of influence for decarbonisation through commissioning  
 Understand business waste volumes and reduce  
Public Sector  
 Increase understanding of organisations consu mption emissions and reduction 
approach  through procurement  
 Understand business waste volumes and reduce  
Business  
 Increase knowledge of own consumption emissions  
 Identify opportunities to develop low and zero carbon products and services  
 Engage with supply chain  on consumption emission reduction  
 Catering establishments assess use of “Winnow system” to reduce waste  
Government  
 Increase awareness of consumption emissions  
 Support business in developing and procuring low consumption emission products  
 Produce consumption emission data by local authority area  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  40-V14-FINAL  
 Innovation  
Challenge  
 Embed circular ec onomy throughout the local economy  
 Develop Hull as a Green SMART  innovation centre  
 Ensuring that opportunities in future low carbon industries are maximised  
 Grasp the economic opportunity around knowledge, digitisation and skills  
 
As we progress to a carbon neutral Hull there are significant economic opportunities 
that will need to be developed and provide the inspiration for innovation in products 
and service s. The growth of knowledge in particular  that around data mining, 
digitisation and robotics provide real opportunities for innovation. The development 
of innovation , within skills acquisition and reskilling programmes , enables innovation 
to become part of the DNA of the carbon neutral Hull economy. The development of 
an inquisitive mind from early education enables innovation to become part of an 
economic approach and increases the opportunities throughout the economy.  
The development of a carbon neutral ci ty provides significant opportunities for 
innovation in products, services and systems as well as new industrial sectors. 
Moving from a carbon based economy with our current high dependence on 
petrochemical  products to one based on bio based compostable plastics is a 
significant market and with the cities  close links to its surrounding rural economy , 
provides opportunities . Further, th e development of bio-based  products  has a global 
market place to access and increase productivity.  
There is  a need to inno vate within the existing plastics sector to develop products 
that are less polluting in manufacture and in end of life disposal. There will still be a 
need , for the foreseeable future , for traditional manufactured plastics within the 
medical and care secto r, for example , but innovation will need to address many of 
the existing  challenges .  
Innovation in ensuring that was te resources do  not fall out of the recycling system 
and can be remanufactured effectively will reduce the unintended consequences of 
plast ics and other valuable resources.   
The development of a hydrogen economy for  heat and transport, as already 
discussed , will lead  to innovation in product design and manufacture  within the 
heatin g sector , for example that  can build upon th e existing  knowled ge with local 
companies like Ideal Standard as well as the development of innovation fro m within  
the University  and extensive SME business es in Hull.  
Carbon  sequestration through carbon  capture and storage, in particular utilisation of 
the carbon , can release new  products and processes in l ine with a circular economy  
approach as well as increase value.  The close link between the Humber and both 41-V14-FINAL  
 the hydrogen and carbon capture and storage development at the moment puts Hull 
in a key position to maxi mise its benefits.  
The circular economy , which is develop ing globally, provides important opportunities  
for resource efficiency  through product and service  design to ensure resource value 
is maximised and  enable future use through both demanufacture and wa ste as 
primary resource. The University of Hull is part of two international research project s 
looking into the potential within the plastic sector and looking at the wider circular 
economy opportunities across all value chains for businesses and communiti es. 
To maximise the benefits of a circular approach Hull will build upon the existing 
circular and industrial symbiosis relations within the city , establishing  innovation 
opportunities and market places for companies to use an d reuse  existing  resources , 
so Hull can maximise the value of all the products within its system . 
Hull’s smart city systems that are already at the heart of technology organisations  
like C4Di and Connexion who are provid ing the building  blocks for innovation. Hull, 
through its public and private sector s, holds vast amounts of data and will develop 
spaces where data can be s hared and explored to create ne w products an d 
services . The development of a smart system around energy , resources an d 
transport , for example , can have impact s beyon d Hull and provides a fruitful area for 
increased productivity  and export beyond the city boundary.  As the first full fibre 
broadband city in the UK29, Hull is the ideal place as the  test bed for carbon neutral 
smart system solution. Hull will leverage this  advantage to maximise the long term 
productivity  and employment benefits .  
While the Committee on Climate Change has stated that nationally the country can 
become net zero by 2050 using known and available technology there are significant 
opportunities to  innovate as we move towards net zero, particularly as the city has a 
2030 target. The target provides the city with a call to accelerate the move to carbon 
neutrality , and deliver an innovation approach that will achieve carbon neutrality , with 
fewer reso urces and maximise t he available  embedded value in existing and new 
areas of the economy . Hull will utilise our greatest  innovators, our residents  and 
businesses , so that we use the insight from experience and familiarity to drive a 
society  wide innovation approach.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                            
29 https://metro.co.uk/2019/10/11/hull -beco mes-uks-first-city-with-full-fibre-broadband -coverage -
10896919/  42-V14-FINAL  
  
Carbon Neutral Innovation Pathway Summary  
Council  
 Understand the circular economy opportunities within business operations  
 Develop city system for circular economy visibility to increase value  
 Identify opportunities to bring in funding to support innovation throughout the 
economy  
 Facilitate Green SMART innovation  
 Work with education establishments on innovation pathways  
Public Sector  
 Understand the circular economy opportunities within business operations  
 Make data available to innovators to identify and develop products, insight and 
services  
Business  
 Identify opportunities for circular economy within own business  and key supply 
chain  
 Consider innovation opportunities within emerging carbon neutral economy and 
suppo rt resources required  
Government  
 Provide support for circular economy development and product innovation  
 Develop national resource exchange systems to increase productivity and value 
maximisation  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 43-V14-FINAL  
 Skills and Jobs  
Challenge  
 Increase awareness and attractiveness of a carbon neutral future economy  
 Increase the ambition to be part of a decarbonised future economy  
 Develop innovation, skills and train ing for low carbon technologies  
 Ensure that carbon intensive sector jobs are t ransitioned to carbon neu tral 
 Understand  the skills and training transition required in  key sectors  
The growth in the future economy will be dominated by the creation of new jobs 
within the green  economy and th e developmen t of new skills within  many sectors  
underpinned by an educa tion system developing through school that identifies the 
challenges of a carbon neutral Hull and the opportunities available . At present the 
green economy  is the fastest expand ing part of the UK economy with the low carbon 
and renewable energy economy gro wing by almost 7% in 2017 and the  global 
economy an d has been growing faster than any other secto r for a numbe r of years.  It 
is expected that this growth will increase over the coming decades with Europe 
seeing up to 2  million additional jobs in this secto r up to 203030. 
Hull has already experienced this growth and transition in the economy  with the 
Siemens Gamesa offshore wind turbine blade manufacturing factory which has seen 
new green  economy jobs created and new skills  gained  within  the economy , and the 
Energyworks ene rgy from waste plant as well as the Ron Dearing UTC developing 
the skills required for future industrial change .  The opportunity for growth within  the 
green energy  sector is significant  and with Government  support for offshore wind  
increasing and greater certainty within  the market supporting inward investment. 
Other areas of green energy from photovoltaic an d solar panels, air source  heat 
pumps , hydrogen  are all sectors that will grow as we move away from gas to heat 
our homes and offices , as well as key linked industries of carbon capture utilisation 
and storage.  
Women into Manufacturing and Engineering  
WiME is a business led programme designed to inspire girls and women to consider 
careers in manufacturing and engineering.  The WiME   Humber events have seen 
over 1,600 girls, parents, teachers and careers advisers attend.  Airco, Siemens 
Gamesa and Swift  Group started as the initial WiME Partners and partner numbers 
has now grown to 45 companies.  The companies involved range from software, 
renewables, energy, chemicals, construction to ports & logistics and advanced 
manufacturing.   
WiME has supported pe ople into employment at companies including Airco, ABP, 
BP, Humber Bridge, Ideal Boilers, Ineos, Siemens Gamesa, Spencer Group and 
Swift Group.  
                                            
30 United Nations International Labour Organisation World Employment Social Outlook 2018  44-V14-FINAL  
 Underpinning the future jobs and skills market will be the education we provide Hull’s 
young people from primary  school onwards. This needs to cover not only how living 
within a carbon neutral Hull will require changes to the behaviours currently in 
society but also to provide the young people with the inspiration to play a leading role 
in how our future carbon neut ral Hull is shaped across all sectors throughout this 
century.  
The construction  sector will require large changes to how construction take s place 
with the increase of Modern Methods  of Construction  likely to be required to meet  
higher  energy efficiency  in new buildings  across the domestic  and commercial 
sectors . The increase in energy efficiency  work within  the housing retrofit  sector ha s 
also seen new skills  developed  around external wall insulation an d the installation  of 
photovoltaic panels  on roofs of homes and commercial  premises.  This is likely to 
increase over the coming decade.  
The expansion on the use  of smart and app based technologies has already seen an 
increase in the use  of smart energy controls  in homes such as Tado, Nest and Hiv e 
and the use of technology  such as “Alexa” and “Google Home”  all provide th e 
opportunity  for an  increase in the green service sector.  
The decarbonisation  of transport through the growth of electric  vehicle s will see th e 
current skills in the repair  and servicing  industry change as will the growth of 
hydrogen vehicles  within  the HGV fleet , shipping and rail . 
These structural economic  transitions demonstrate  the rapid changes that are 
happening but also that they will accelerate rapidly over the coming decad e if we are 
to become a leading carbon neutral economy.  
Hull is at a critical point in understand ing the green economy skills required for the 
future growth of the c ity and how it can ensure that business, industry, training 
providers, schools and colleges  are in the best place to take maximum advantage of 
the opportunities and ensure that the transition away from a carbon based economy 
gene rates new employment and growth and that these opportunities are made 
accessible to all.  
Carbon Neutral Skills and Tra ining Pathway Summary  
Council  
 Work with training providers and businesses to ensure that the right training 
courses are available in the City for its key economic sectors  
 Ensure that staff within the Council and its companies have the training and skills 
required for the green economy  
 Work with schools to raise understanding of the employment opportunities in the 
green economy in the City and the qualifications, training and apprenticeships 
available  
 Work with partners to address gender gap in a carbon neutral economy  
Public Sector  
 Assess how a carbon neutral economy will affect service demand and 
requirements  
 Ensur e that all employees have the training and skills required for the green 
economy  45-V14-FINAL  
  Humber LEP to develop a strategic skills plan focusing on g reen economic 
transition to support the SME sector  
Business  
 Understand the opportunities to your business of developing existing products and 
services for the green economy and the new skills and training required  
 Understand how the transition away from carbon intensive activity and fuel sources 
will affect your current staff training and skills and the new ones that will need to be 
acquired  
Government  
 Provide funding to business and training bodies to ensure that courses can be 
developed and resourced e ffectively  
 Work with national accreditation bodies to ensure that the right skills are available 
for the green economy  
 Support the development of local skill and training transition audits in key sectors  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  46-V14-FINAL  
 Fair Transition  
Challenge  
 Ensuring that carbon neutral heating doesn’t increase  fuel poverty  
 Ensuring  that businesses and residents understand what a net zero Hull looks 
like 
 Ensuring  that the jobs in high carbon industries and businesses are protected  
 Ensuring  that residents are able to access new carbon neutral economy jobs  
 
The move to a carbon neutral Hull will  need to ensure that everyone  benefits from 
the changes , and that it does not create additional burdens on vulnerable residents 
and businesses  in particular transition within current high  carbon dependant  sectors.  
The role of young people in ensuring a fair transition is crucial as there is a high level 
of interest and inspiration that they are bringing to addressing the challenge of 
climate change.  En suring a fair transition needs to be inclusive and working with 
Hull’s young people to shape the future and address the social and economic 
potential impacts of carbon neutral Hull is critical.  
The most pressing issues is ensuring that the move to zero carbon heating does not 
increase the num bers of residents in fuel poverty and is developed to reduce  this 
number . Improvements in energy efficiency  and thermal performance wi thin homes 
will help  reduce the d emand for heating in some homes. H owever, t he imp lications of  
potential in creased hea ting costs, fro m electric an d hydrogen heating need to be 
better understood , so that effective approaches to alleviating fuel poverty can be 
taken locally , but a lso so that Hull can provide th e evidence  to shape Governm ent 
policy and investment in this area.  
Becoming a carbon neutral city will require action to ensure that residents  are 
equipped for the changes in th e workplace . This includes  training for new entrants  to 
the jobs market and reskilling for those  currently  in employment , be that in business 
and industries  that are currently high carbon based as well as those required for the  
new “green” jobs  in the economy . 
There will be significant new industries  in hydrogen generation, carbon capture 
utilisation and stora ge, electricity  grid development and  electric/ hydroge n transport 
sectors for example, that will require both new skills and reskilling. There will be an 
increase in automation and data analysis services as SMART approaches are 
developed.  
The carbon neutral economy  will need to generate an increase in employment  
opportunities and productivity for residents and working with local business and 
industries and training providers develop a clearer  understanding of how sectors will 
be affected as the pace and scale of change increases over the next decade to 
ensure that courses at colleges and training  centres can be made appropriate .  47-V14-FINAL  
 There will need to be clear economic analysis of th e local economy an d engagement  
with business and entrepreneurs  to support transition to a carbon neutral city an d 
ensure that not only jobs are created an d protected  but also that productivity in th e 
local economy grows as a result of th e changes  that will happen.  
The delivery of carbon neutrality through changes in transport will have significant 
benefits for improving air quality, a key challenge for Hull. Poor air quality 
disproportionately impacts residents who live in areas with a high concentration of 
roads or close to trunk roads, polluting industries and busin esses. The port also 
creates significant air quality challenges from ship movements and freight 
movements associated with port activity.  
The transitio n to a carbon neutral mobility sector will  require, as previously 
discussed, a move to a system that incen tivises more sustainable modes  of travel 
like public transport. However  for those  that ar e currently dependent  upon car travel 
and can only access second hand vehicles  there is a challenge . The number of 
electric  vehicle s in Hull at present and in the foreseeable future will not generate a 
significant  enough second hand market for the price to not be beyond the reach of 
our lower paid residents . The Government ’s 2040 target  for hybrid and electric 
vehicles,  mentioned above, is unlikely to cre ate a substantial second hand market for 
at least 15 -25 years unless the target  date is brought forward and the current costs 
of an electric vehicle  fall and the availability of electric vehicles increases markedly .  
Linked  to this is the challenge to prov ide a  charging solution fo r residents without off 
street charging as discusse d above in the Mobility chapter as well as developing a 
robust and efficient sustainable travel system.  
Consequently , a key approach moving forward over the next ten years is to o btain a 
greater insight into achieving fair transition  and develop both local responses  based 
upon our understanding  but also provide the evidence to Government to facilitate 
policy changes to ensure a fair transition to a carbon neutral society.  Hull will be able 
to learn from working being developed , at present,  by the Scottish Just Transition 
Commission31 to help understanding the  approaches requiring adoption . 
Fuel poverty, access to charge points, access to sustainable travel,  jobs in existing 
businesse s and jobs in new and developing businesses are just the start of our 
journey to full y understand and ensure fair transition to a carbon neutral Hull.  
 
Carbon Neutral Fair Transition Pathway Summary  
Council  
 Continue to reduce fuel poverty  
 Undertake Citizens Inquiries into the key transition challenges and opportunities  
 Integrate  Fair Transition  assess ment within climate commission work 
programme to identify  key risks and solutions   
 Ensure investment organisations have signed up to the voluntary Task Force on 
Climate Related Financial Disclosures  
Public Sector  
                                            
31 https://www.gov.scot/groups/just -transition -commission/  48-V14-FINAL  
  Ensure that roadmaps for carbon neutrality establish fair transition  
 Assess organisation investment companies have signed up to the voluntary Task 
Force on Climate Related Financial Disclosures  
Business  
 Understand the impact on the current and future skills required  by workforce  
 Understand cross sector skills deficits to support the development of effective 
training provision  
Government  
 Develop future work assessments of carbon neutral economy and sectoral 
challenges  
 Undertaken fuel poverty assessment of carbon neutral heating  
 Develop national approach to fair transition addressing local challenges  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  49-V14-FINAL  
 Carbon Sequestration  
Challenge  
 Significantly inc rease the amount of land developed with Natural System 
Solutions  
 Develop a carbon reuse economy  
 Enable local carbon sequestration of embedded carbon in development  
 Ensure that technical carbon sequestration is developed that benefits Hull  
 
Carbon sequestration presents  a natural a nd technical element  approach ; tree/ 
habitat creation, restoration and management and carbon c apture and storage. 
While the city does not have a concentration of high carbon emitting manufacturing 
or power generation as other parts of the Humber , the proxi mity of Hull to the 
proposed carbon capture and storage networks , provides the oppor tunity  for Hull 
business with significant carbon emissions to utilise technical carbon capture 
technology , on site , and feed into the proposed network to the southern north  sea 
being developed under the Zero Carbon Humber32 project . 
Hull is working closely through the Humber L ocal Economic Partnership (Humber 
LEP) with partners so that it can ensure that as the carbon capture and storage 
infrastructure develops the city can ensure that businesses are able to take 
advantage.  
The technical  carbon sequestration approach will address carbon at the point of 
emission for some businesses,  and the City will take significant steps to reduce  its 
emissions through the activities covered in the other chapters  though there will still 
be some carbon emission that will be generated . These emissions can only be 
addressed  through natural carbon sequestration or natural system solutions . The 
Committee on Cl imate Change  has identified that nationally there needs to be a 
significant  increase  in tree planting to meet this gap between reducing emission  and 
storing carbon from those emissions that cannot be avoided.  
Local analysis ha s identified  that applying the national  net zero tree planting target to 
Hull will require th e planting  of 22,000 -36,000 trees a year . In the 2019 planting  
season Hull has plant ed 14,000 trees  and another 44,000 , over the period 2020 -
2022 , will be planted in the HEY woods area. While the planting in  Hull in the last 
year places it as the leading local authority  area for tree planting  within the Northern  
Forest area , the scale of tree planting required over the coming  decade is significant  
and will require new  funding mo dels to sit  alongside current sources  as well as a 
clear understanding of Hull’s tree planting land capacity . 
 
                                            
32 https://www.zerocarbonhumber.co.uk/  50-V14-FINAL  
  
  Unit UK Hull HEYwoods  
Total Land Area  km2 242,495  71.5 2,479  
Committee on 
Climate Change 
30,000ha/year 
target  Hectares per 
year 30,000  9 307 
Trees per 
year    75,000,000         22,114           766,717  
Committee on 
Climate Change 
50,000ha/year 
target  Hectares per 
year 50,000  15 511 
Trees per 
year  125,000,000         36,856        1,277,861  
Table 5: Committee on Climate Change Net Zero tree planting requirements pro -rated for 
Hull   
To ensure that natural systems solutions provide the carbon neutral solutions fo r the 
city, there is a requirement to more fully understand what the scope is for tree 
planting , both within  and outside the city .  The carbon sequestration potential will 
also need to be considered  against other land u se opportunities  such as energy 
generation discussed previously . 
This assessment will enable a target to be set for the full p otential for tree planting  
alongside other natural system solutions . 
Hull, with its close relationship to the river and estuary,  has a greater potential to 
deliver carbon sequestration through multiple habitat creation solutions . It is able to 
develop approaches  that store carbon quickly in the short term, more slowly  over the 
long term and  provides habitats that are adaptable to climate change so that carbon 
does not leak from the natural system as the climate warms.  
The Humber Estuary, River Hull and drain systems provide opportunities to look at 
different natural carbon storage solutions , aside from trees , to see how different 
grasses and the way that water edges are managed can increase carbon  storage 
capacity  and provide increased biodiversity benef its. 
The development of natural  system solutions provide  significant  co-benefits with 
society wide benefits. Within urban areas tree s33 and habitats  in parks, school 
grounds , gardens, business parks, road sides and in the public realm provide air 
quality be nefits and natural cooling and shading. These areas alongside wider  
woodland and habitats  reduce  flood risk , increase biodiversity  and provide  access to 
the countryside and nature, which  has proven physical and mental health benefits34.  
Alongside th e creat ion of new carbon  sequestration and the use  of net biodiversity 
gain through  planning, there is a need to continue to maintain Hull’s existing  tree 
                                            
33 https: //leaf.leeds.ac.uk/i -tree-leeds -putting -a-value -on-the-citys-trees/  
34 http://publications.naturalengland.org.uk/file/10620067  51-V14-FINAL  
 cover an d habits. Increasing  community ownership of areas that have been 
developed such as those in Gipsyvil le and North Bransholme  has long term benefits . 
The development of increased tree planting and habitat creation for sequestration 
benefits provides th e opportunity  to generate new funding  models  linked to local 
businesses,  funding carbon offsetting as part of a wider  decarbonisation strategy . 
The Committee on Climate Change has stated  that carbon  sequestration should take 
place within the U K, and the city therefore , has th e opportunity  to develop  an 
effective local natural system solution funding model and leading sequestration 
approach based  on reducing  carbon  emissions  and ensuring effective  climate 
adaptation.  
 
Carbon Neutral Sequestration Pathway Summary  
Council  
 Work with local business and Government on technical carbon capture and 
storage opportunities  
 Assess  all Council land holdings  for PV, battery and sequestration potential.  
 Develop local natural carbon sequestration investment model for the city  
 Deliver national leading net biodiversity gain schemes through Planning  
 Develop with partne rs the natural assets of the city to establish global leading 
urban sequestration solutions  
Public Sector  
 Develop funding models with partners for natural sequestration investment  
 Assess estate for carbon sequestration potential  
Business  
 Support local natural carbon sequestration solutions  
 Develop local natural  carbon sequestra tion as part of a wider decarbonisation 
strategy  
 Assess whether a technical carbon capture approach  would be viable for your 
business  and steps required  
Government  
 Provide long term funding for tree planting in line with the recommendations of the 
Committee on Climate Change  
 Provide funding to assess the impacts of different natural sequestration solutions  
in Estuary and River habitats  
 Provide funding to link sequestration and ad aptation natural system solutions  
 
 
 
 
 52-V14-FINAL  
 Glossary  
Net Zero/ Carbon Neutrality:  
Production based Carbon emissions cannot exceed zero. This does not mean that 
no carbon emissions are released, or no fossil fuels are burnt, but that the small 
amount that are r eleased are subsequently captured, by natural means (e.g. trees 
and mangroves) or by human -made inventions (e.g. carbon capture and storage).  
Decarbonisation  
Means reducing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from the production and 
consumption of goods and services. The phrase is broadly used to describe the 
activities undertaken to achieve net zero or carbon neutrality.  
Natural System Solutions:  
This covers a suite of natural solutions to capture carbon as has been done by the 
environment over millennia. So lutions include tree planting (urban areas, parks, 
woodland and forests), habitat creation such as peat bog restoration, inter -tidal mud 
flats, and mangrove and seagrass tidal areas. This also includes the management of 
these areas to preserve and enhance their carbon storage abilities.  
Carbon Capture Utilisation and Storage:  
This is a process where by a chemical reaction is engineered in waste gases from a 
process so that the carbon dioxide is captured. The carbon dioxide is then moved 
either by vehicle or  more likely by an underground piped network for storage most 
likely within former depleted oil and gas caverns offshore. The carbon could also be 
utilised in other processes such as brewing or greenhouse growing.  
Carbon Budgets:  
These take a maximum amount of carbon (e.g. 20 tonnes) that can be emitted over a 
set period of time (e.g. 20 years) and breaks this down into a series of budgets for 
example 5 tonnes per 5 year budget period so that the overall 20 year budget of 20 
tonnes is not exceeded. Car bon budgets are contained in the Climate Change Act 
and Paris Agreement setting total UK and global carbon.  
Carbon Targets:  
This sets a future target for carbon reduction e.g. carbon neutral by 2030. However, 
if this is not linked to a carbon budget, of ma ximum carbon emissions over a time 
period, then meeting a target for carbon reductions may mean that significantly more 
carbon may be emitted  
 
 
 53-V14-FINAL  
 Appendix 1  
Peoples Panel June 2019 Climate Change Infograp hic 
 
54-V14-FINAL  
 Appendix 2  
United Nations Sustainable Development Goals  
No poverty  
Zero hunger  
Good health and well -being  
Quality education  
Gender equality  
Clean water and sanitation  
Affordable and clean energy  
Decent work and economic growth  
Industry, innovation and infrastructure  
Reduced inequalities  
Sustainable cities and communities  
Responsible consumption and production  
Climate action  
Life below water  
Life on land  
Peace justice and strong institutions  
Partnerships  
 
 
 
 
 