1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lewisham Climate Emergency  Strategic Action Plan  
2020 -2030  
 
2 
 Joint Foreword by the Mayor of Lewisham , Damien Egan, Cabinet Lead, Sophie McGeevor, and the Young Mayor, Femi Komolafe  
Society faces a climate and ecological crisis that is the legacy of a generation of inaction.  The declaration of a Climate 
Emergency by Lewisham Council, and hundreds of other organisations up and down the country, is the first step in 
answer to the call for a new response to this crisis. The difference in the impetus for change is th at this call for action 
has come from citizens, and particularly from young people, internationally, but also here in the borough.  
Collectively we have an obligation to future generations. We also have a duty to protect the most vulnerable members 
of our society.  Globally, and locally, the oldest, youngest, the least well off and those with health conditions will bear 
the brunt of a changing climate.  
As a society our way of living needs to be based around a new contract.  A contract that ensures governme nt, business, 
media, communities and individuals are accountable for their actions and choices, and that we find the way to balance 
the demands of today against the needs of the future.  
Meeting this challenge will fundamentally change how we live, but if it is to be successful, this change will not be about 
giving things up: instead it will be a way to enrich our lives. Taking strong action on energy, carbon and our environment 
means our air will be cleaner, our homes warmer, we will feel healthier, and we  will live in places designed for people 
with green spaces teeming with life.  
Action on climate change also has the power to create a renaissance in the British economy. Across the country millions 
of jobs could be created and Lewisham is already home to some of the most exciting businesses in the green economy.  
To meet the Climate Emergency the investment required is huge, a minimum of £1.6bn over 10 years. But the cost of 
not acting is predicted to be even higher. We are incredibly proud that Lewisham i s at the forefront of councils 
responding to the climate emergency and believe this Action Plan sets the path for the borough to be carbon neutral by 
2030 and ensure we will leave a greener, better Lewisham for future generations.  
 
March 2020  
3 
  
 
Introduction by the Chief Executive , Kim Wright  
 
Index  
Section One: Context  p4 
Introduction  p4 
Evidence B ase p6 
The Benefits of A ction  p9 
Section Two:  Action Plan  p11 
Leading by Example  p12 
Sustainable Housing  p22 
Decarbonised Transport  p34 
Greener, Adaptive Lewisham  p40 
Inspiring, Learning and Lobbying  p45 
Section Three: Delivery  P51 
Annex A: Communications Strategy  P53 
Annex B: Carbon Offset Fund  P57 
Annex C:  Evidence Base Detail (published separately)   
 
Lewisham Cou ncil is fully committed to tackling the climate emergency. The scale of the crisis is unprecedented and we 
do not underestimate the challenge we face, but our ambition and determination to act is unrivalled. The climate 
emergency is relevant for all of our  services and we all have a part to play. We recognise and embrace our role as a local 
leader: championing good practice, developing innovative solutions and supporting our residents , businesses and 
partners. Our Climate E mergency Action Plan  sets out what  we pledge to do, our achievements so far and, critically, our 
asks of others: we know that  we cannot do this alone, and it is essential we galvanise support to ensure collective action. 
We must, therefore, work in partnership with our residents, community  groups, businesses, schools and young people 
here in Lewisham, and with the rest of the public sector, if we are to come close to achieving our ambitious target.  
 4 
 SECTION ONE : CONTEXT  
 
Introduction  
1.1  In 2018 the Inte rgovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) published  a stark warning of the consequences of failing to limit global warming to a 1.5ºC 
rise1.  The IPCC assessment acknowledges th e scale of the challenge means rapid  and far-reaching changes in all aspects  of society, but is also clear that 
taking action and delivering on the existing commitments of the United National Framework on Climate Change is the way to a more sustainable and 
equitable society.  
1.2 There is substantial evidence that climate change as  a result of human activity is linked to increasing frequency and intensity of extreme weather events 
such as flooding, heat waves, drought and storms. There is no safe level of global temperature rise, and temperatures are already 1 ºC above pre -industrial  
levels, and forecast to rise 0.2 ºC a decade. This evidence is, largely, uncontested. Recognition of the threat of climate change is the mains tream view in the 
media and by the majority of  governments  across the world .  Yet action has been unambitious and slow.   
1.3 This disconnect between words and action is what underpins the sense of a climate crisis . Within a generation, unchecked global temperature rises are 
forecast2 to lead to average UK summ er temperatures in excess of 30 ºC, a halving of annual rai nfall , and a  40% increase in extreme rainfall intensity .  These 
kinds of changes  will have overwhelming consequences  for many residents.  
1.4 This threat requires an urgent response from all sectors of society , including locally , and in 201 9 Lewisham  Counc il declared a Climate Emergency  and 
proposed a  new ambition  for the borough to be carbon neutral by 2030. By the end of February 2020 twenty -eight London boroughs had made a similar 
declaration , with the majority setting the same target as Lewisham. While local authorities do not have direct control of the majority of local emissions, they 
deliver a range of regulatory and strategic functions in key sectors such as housing and transport and have significant influence in their roles as community 
leaders, maj or employers, social landlords and through their procurement of goods and services.  
1.5 At the London level, in November  2019 the London Environment Directors’ Network and the Transport and Environment Committee issued a joint Climate 
Emergency statement3 setting out six priority areas:  
1. Retrofit London: Retrofit all domestic and non -domestic buildings to an average level of EPC B;  
2. Low -carbon development: Secure low carbon buildings and infrastructure via borough planning;  
3. Halve road journeys made  by petrol and diesel;  
                                                           
1 https://www.ipcc.ch/sr15/   
2 See Environment Agency Climate Impacts Tool 2019 https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/climate -impacts -tool  
3 https://www.londoncouncils.gov.uk/node/36755   5 
 4. Secure 100% renewable energy for London’s public sector now and in the future;  
5. Reduce consumption emissions by two thirds, focusing on food, clothing, electronics and aviation;  
6. Develop London’s low carbon sector and green our broader economy.  
1.7 Despite this momentum for action a decade of budget cuts has left the local government sector facing unprecedented challenges delivering its statutory 
responsibilities .  Lewisham Council’s funding from government has been cut by o ver 58% since 2013/144. The Council has also faced increased costs through 
population growth, changes to government policy and other pressures.  There are no extra resources available to lo cal authorities that declare a C limate 
Emergency and we will need t o find creative ways to find the resources needed to support this work.   
1.6 This challenge, and the challenge of cutting carbon emissions, will continue to get more difficult as the population of the b orough continues to grow.  The 
Greater London Authorit y forecast a growth in Lewisham’s population of 19% between 2017 and 2040.  This will increase demand for local services and 
infrastructure, as well as increase pressures on local housing  and, without action , lead to an increase in carbon emissions . Yet g rowth also creates 
opportunities , and city living is low carbon living . The revitalisation of our town centres  and investment in services and strategic infrastructure, particularly 
transport , is exactly what is needed to support Lewisham’s transform ation to  a carbon neutral borough.  
1.7 The Council ’s assessment of the work needed shows that the level of investment needed is huge, with a minimum of £1.6bn needed to decarbonise the 
borough over 10 years.  Lewisham Council is not in a position to take on these costs  alone , and while we recognise we need to demons trate leadership in 
terms of our operations , our priority must be to lobby Government to rapidly accelerate decarbonisation across the UK.  
1.8 Given the high costs and the level of challenge involved it is essential to understand the motivation for taking action. We are clear that action on climate 
change is action to support the most vulnerable in our communities5. The consequences of inaction  risks costs that will be impossible to meet.  It is right tha t 
the public sector stands up for  those least able to protect themselves  and Lewisham’s  Climate Emergency  Action Plan  seeks to place social justice at its 
centre .  
1.9 Lewisham also recognises the wide  range of positive benefits  a carbon neutral borough wo uld bring to our residents and communities , such as new skills 
and jobs, improved health and quality of life and support for wider environmental and social outcomes. In seeking to galvanise our partners and 
communities  our aim is to reframe what it means t o take action on climate change .  Delivering what the IPCC describes as ‘ rapid and far -reaching changes to 
society ’ is going to be hugely difficult, and to be successful the focus needs to move from what we may lose by taking action to what our residents a nd 
communities gain : reclaiming streets, our access to fresh air  and open spaces, enjoying warm homes and vibrant local communities.  
 
  
                                                           
4 https://lewisham.gov.uk/mayorandcouncil/aboutthecouncil/finances/budgets   
5 https://www.climatejust.org.uk/socially -vulnerable -groups -sensitiv e-climate -impacts   6 
 Evidence B ase 
1.10 In August 2019 officers appointed Aether consultants to provide additional evidence to underpin the C ouncil’s Action Plan6.  The ‘Route to Neutral’ research 
was designed to support this Action Plan  in relation to:  
• defining and measuring the ambition to be carbon neutral by 2030 ; 
• establish ing a baseline for Lewisham;  
• identifying and costing the range  of actions that would be required.  
1.11 The Council’s baseline for this study was 2017/18, the most recent year available  for most datasets . The study calculated the borough’s baseline as 804,961 
tonnes CO 2e broken down as follows:  
 
 
                                                           
6 http://councilmeetings.lewisham.gov.uk/documents/s71180/04%20Climate%20Emergency%20update%20210120.pdf    
7 
 1.12 Three scenarios  were developed with increasingly stretching actions across a range of sectors to assess the scope and cost of activity needed  to deliver on 
the definition of carbon neutral by 2030. The table below summarises the reductions achieved through the modelling of carbon emissions in the scenarios.   
Scenario  Emission 
reduction from 
Baseline 2030/31  Borough wide  Lewisham Council  
   tCO2  % 
reduction  Remaining 
emissions    
(tCO2)  Cost of 
carbon offset 
(£M) Remaining 
emissions   
(tCO2)  Cost of 
carbon 
offset 
(£M)  
Core Actions  92,505  15%  505,365  34.6  11,054   0.76  
Radical S tretch  276,663  45%  324,578  22.2  7,683  0.53  
Systemic C hange  486,665  80%  122,129  8.4  129 0.01  
 
1.13 The figure below presents the same data showing where the residual carbon emissions are from . 
 
 
 
8 
 Scenario / Sector  Capital Cost (£M)  1.14       
 
 
 
 
 
1.15 
 
 
 
 
 
1.16  Carbon emissions have been falling in Lewisham.  Government reports annually 
on carbon emissions at a local authority level, with the latest data covering the 
period 2005 -20177.  Befo re the declaration of a Climate Emergency , Lewisham 
Council had set a target of a 44% reduction in the borough’s emissions by 2020. 
Based on the most recent data there had been a fall of 38% in local carbon 
emissions since the baseline , with three years’ d ata remaining.   
 
While this is ahead of the schedule for achieving our previous target, realising the 
ambition to be carbon neutral by 2030 needs a radically different approach.  The 
study estimated costs of £1.6bn to deliver the scenarios needed to reduc e 
carbon to a level that would make this conceivable .  This cost estimate is 
considered an underestimate particularly in relation to transport infrastructure 
where comparator data was not available. The table below shows these costs.  
 
The estimated costs b roadly reflect the analysis of where the borough’s carbon 
emissions come from . Just over 50% of the investment needed, £843m, relates 
to private housing.  Social housing and Lewisham Homes accounts for a further 
£393m.  In the systemic change scenario £167 m spend is forecast in relation to 
Council buildings and schools.  Delivering the kind of actions within the Radical 
Stretch and Systemic Change scenarios will fundamentally depend on central 
government providing the Council and others locally with the res ources .  Core A ction  226 
Lewisham Council  2.4 
Lewisham homes  77 
Other social housing  53 
Schools  28 
Other Public sector  2.6 
Transport  42 
Commercial  13 
Energy Generation  7.2 
Radical Stretch  803 
Lewisham Council  10 
Lewisham h omes  119 
Other social housing  82 
Schools  32 
Other Public sector  2.6 
Private housing  484 
Transport  47 
Commercial  13  
Energy Generation  12  
Systemic  Change    591  
Lewisham Council  50  
Lewisham homes  37  
Other social housing  25  
Schools  117  
Private housing  359  
Transport /Commercial  NO DATA   
Energy Generation  3.2  
Grand Total    1619   
                                                           
7 https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/uk -local -authority -and-regional -carbon -dioxide -emissions -national -statistics -2005 -to-2017   9 
 The B enefits of A ction  
1.17  Action on climate change can have many local benefits, including lower energy bills, economic regeneration and  creation of local jobs,  reductions in fuel 
poverty, improved air quality  and public spaces that work for people . Furthermore, increasing resilience to climate change risks reduces exposure to the costs 
of flood damage to buildings, infrastructure and serv ices, enhanced green spaces and improved health.   Our a mbition  in delivering Lewisham’s Climate 
Emergency Action Plan is t o recognise and work towards the widest possible range of benefits through respon ding  to the climate crisis  and to reframe what it 
mea ns to take action as something that has tangible positive benefits . 
1.18  Risks from climate change identified in the Government’s UK Climate Change Risk Assessment 20178 include : 
• To health and wellbeing from high temperatures;  
• Shortages in the public w ater supply;  
• Food production and trade;  
• New and emerging pests and diseases.  
1.19  Taking action to reduce carbon emissions means cutting the numbers of vehicles on our streets and cleaning up heating systems , actions that have direct 
benefits for local  air quality.  H alf of those people living in areas in Lewisham with the highest concentrations of NO2 and PM10 come from deprived 
communities; https://www.london.gov.uk/sites/default/files/aether_updated_london_air_pollution_exposure_final_20 -2-17.pdf   
1.20  Promoting active travel and creating places where walking and cycling are the natural choice of getting about could make a bi g contribution to improving 
health.  Lewisham’s Joint Strategic Needs Assessment9, ‘A Picture of Lewisham ’, describes the population of the borough in terms of the key health and socio -
demographic characteristics . The JSNA finds that :  
 37% of year 6 pupils ov erweight or obese in Lewisham;  
 Physical inactivity is the fourth largest cause of disease and disability in the UK;  
 In Lewisham almost a quarter of adults (18+) are classified as physically inactive;  
 In 2016/17 there were 323.9 asthma -related hospital admi ssions for patients under 19 years’ old  per 100,000 population (London average 201.2).  
1.21  National Energy Action (NEA) have estimated10 that £10m a year is spent in each Health and Wellbeing Board area in England treating people with health 
conditions c aused, or worsened by, living in a cold home and that in the four years from 2012 -2016 over £5 billion of tax payers’ money was spent treating 
the effects of fuel pov erty whilst 117,000 people died needlessly due to the cold .  An area -wide retrofit program me significantly raising the energy efficiency 
of our housing stock and installing clean and efficient heating systems would benefit individuals but also significantly redu ce the burden on hard -pressed 
front line staff and budgets across the NHS, public he alth and social care.  
                                                           
8 https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/uk -climate -change -risk-assessment -2017   
9 http://www.lewishamjsna.org.uk/a -profile -of-lewisham   
10 http://www.nea.org.uk/media/news/260216 -01/  10 
 1.22  Low carbon and renewable energy activities in the UK generated a turnover of £44.5 billion in 2017, directly employing 209,50 0 people11. It has been 
estimated that this will grow to 2 million ‘green economy ’ jobs created in the U K by 203012.  Taking early action and working with local educational and 
training institutions as well as local businesses could give Lewisham a significant competitive advantage when it comes to he lping our residents and local 
economy make the most of thes e opportunities. While i mproving the energy efficiency of homes and making more sustainable food and transport choices 
will also leave residents with more disposable income that can be spent in the local economy.  
 
  
                                                           
11 https://www.ons.gov.uk/economy/environmentalaccounts/bulletins/finalestimates/2017   
12 https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/ views -on-the-green -economy -survey -of-young -people   also https://greengb.campaign.gov.uk/   11 
 SECTION TWO : ACTION PLAN  
 
2.1 The A ction Plan covers 5  delivery areas:  
 Leading B y Example ; 
 Sustainable H ousing ; 
 Decarbonised T ransport ; 
 Greener Adaptive Lewisham ; 
 Inspiring, Learning  and L obbying . 
  
2.2 Content in each delivery area includes the following sections:  
 ‘Our ambition and the challeng e we face ’, which seeks to summarise what th e section cover s and our overarching approach;  
 ‘What we have done ’, which provides an update on actions we have already taken or are delivering;  
 ‘Future actions ’, which sets out our planned approach going forward ; 
 ‘Our asks of others ’, which identifies the actions needed by others particularly from government to deliver on the actions we have identified.  
 
2.3 To support delivery and development of the Action Plan , each action has a reference number and an indicati on of the timeframe for delivery, the cost and the 
owner of the action. Given the scope of work, the complexity of many of the actions and the 10 year timeframe there are a wide range of variables involved.  
Changes to costs, resources, technology as well as socio -economic factors will require changes to the Action Plan  which will need to be be regularly reviewed and 
updated.  
 
2.4 Specific dates have been used where these are known. Timeframe s have otherwise been defined as follows:  
 2020/21 – From April 202 0 to March 2021 ; 
 Short term - The first three years of the delivery plan  up to March 20 23; 
 Medium term  - The middle three years of the delivery plan  up to March 20 26; 
 Long term - The final five years of the  delivery plan: up to March 20 31. 
 
2.5 Costs have  been used where these are known.  Costs have otherwise been defined as follows:  
 £  (0-£9,999 ); 
 ££ (£10,000 -£99,999 ); 
 £££ ( £100,000 -£999,999 ); 
 ££££ ( £1m+ ); 
 ??££ ( Unknown ). 12 
  
Leading By E xample: our ambition and the challenge we face  
 
Our evidence -base  shows  that the Council is responsible for 3% of the borough’s carbon emissions . We  have limited direct control over much of the remainder.  
Nevertheless the Council is well -placed to influence others , in our work with partners and communit ies, as an employer an d through  procurement of goods and 
services .  To influence others in a credible way we need to demonstrate our commitment to reducing our own carbon footprint.  The aspiration for our own 
operations should match our ambition for the borough as a whole to be  carbon neutral .  Delivering this should reduce our exposure to rising energy and carbon 
costs , but will require significant investment and need effort and ingenuity .  How we approach this also needs to be in balance with, and support, other 
corporate prio rities such as inclusivity, delivering affordable housing and improving public health.  
 
We have already made progress reduc ing our energy consumption by  rationalising Council offices and through lighting and heating improvements.  The big 
challenges we fa ce going forward include:  
 The poor state of many of the remaining occupied corporate buildings, and the disruption that large scale refurbishment would  have on service delivery;  
 The financial viability of large -scale improvement works , which  are unlikely to deliver enough savings particularly for older buildings that have exceeded their  
expected lifespan;  
 Finding ways to increase the level of investment in s chools , which account for more than 50% of our emissions  from buildings ;  
 Improving b uildings in the  council’s commercial portfolio that do not meet existing or expected standards in relation to energy performance ; 
 The cost of infrastructure and technology needed to provide full electrification of the council’s fleet .  
 
Emissions from buildings and trans port are just one part of this. As well as seeking to get to grips with bricks and mortar we aim to engage with staff and service 
planning to shape a change of culture and embed action on climate change into the way the Council operates. One of the most ef fective ways we can do this is by 
measuring and reporting our environmental performance and communicating to staff what this means and why it is important.  
 
  13 
  
Leading B y Example : what we have done  
 
Objective  Actions  
1.1 
Delivering 
organisational 
cultur e 
change  Lewisham was the second borough in London to declare a Climate Emergency in February 201913.  In January 2020 we published14 the 
findings from a detailed assessment of the borough’s carbon emissions and the scale and cost of work needed to deliver o n the ambition 
for the Council to be carbon neutral by 2030.   
Climate Emergency Working Group set up in June 2019 chaired by the Executive Director for Housing, Environment and Regenerati on. 
‘Climate Emergency Implications’ added to corporate template  for all formal reports in 2020.  
The formation of the Council’s Climate Emergency  Staff Forum in July 2019. The forum now has nearly 50 members with representation 
from all Council directorates  and Lewisham Homes ; 
900 pledges from staff at corporate e vent in January 2020 to reduce use of plastic, reduce meat and dairy consumption and choose more 
sustainable travel options.   
Investment in a new Climate Emergency post for 2020 -22. 
Inclusion of social value within the corporate procurement process, p roviding 10% of the assessment of tenders.  
Switched from automatically printing papers at Council meetings a nd upgrading IT for councillors and staff . 
1.2 
Achieving a 
carbon 
neutral 
corporate  
estate  The Council has consolidat ed its operations into fewer  buildings whilst improving the residual estate and generating revenue from the 
remainder. To date, this approach has generated a net saving to the Council in excess of £2M.  
The Council has invested in the refurbishment of Laurence House including impro vements to heating, ventilation and lighting that will 
deliver carbon reductions.  This work will allow it to remain fit for purpose for a further 8 -10 years whilst the Catford town centre 
masterplan is delivered. The refurbishment allowed the council to extend agile working and enabled further consolidation of staff from 
other office sites to Laurence House.  
Increased investment in the Corporate energy team in 2019 through a new senior energy manager position .  
Improved data collection processes and c leansing of energy management software . 
Following a waste audit of our main corporate sites in January 2020 we rolled out improved waste and recycling facilities  and added food 
waste  collection.  
Removal of single use plastic cups from corporate sites i n 2019  and ending the use of plastic single -use umbrella sleeves.  
1.3 
Reducing 
carbon Fuel consumption reduced by 227,000 litres per annum since 2007 a reduction of 15%.  
Agreement in December 2019 of a new i nvestment strat egy for vehicles ensur ing low emission standards and compliance with the Ultra 
Low Emission Zone.15  
                                                           
13 http://councilmeetings.lewisham.gov.uk/documents/s62942/Motion%202%20proposed%20Cllr%20Anwar%20seconded%20Cllr%20Krupski.pdf   
14 http://councilmeetings.lewisham.gov.uk/documents/s71180/04%20Climate%20Emergency%20update%20210120.pdf   
15 http://councilmeetings.lewisham.gov.uk/ieDec isionDetails.aspx?AIId=23061     14 
 intensity of 
service 
delivery  In 2016 the Council implemented a s treetlight ing ‘dimming and trimming ’ that varied the intensity of lights and made changes to timings 
to start lighting later and end earlier16.  The changes delivered an estimated 25% reduction in the energy consumption of the borough’s 
street lights . 
1.4 
Improvements 
across schools  
 Ashmead School improvements:  
• Off site construction new build reducing waste, carbon admis sions and noise pollution;  
• BREEAM (Building Research Establishment Environmental Assessment Method ) excellent in line with planning conditions;  
• No air conditioning required;   
• Maximises efficiencies in design for minimising heat loss and other inefficienc ies. 
Turnham School improvements:  
• Rooftop extension and partial refurb, BREEAM target was met in the design;  
• New B uilding Management System  (BMS) system displaying school energy use in reception area.  
New Woodlands:  
• New build was off site construc tion and therefore reduced waste, carbon admissions and noise pollution;  
• Focus on sustainable urban drainage solution to prevent risk of flooding;  
• Increased planting on site to support bio -diversity & habitat creation.  
Greenvale:  
• BREEAM Excellent in line with planning condition;  
• Life cycle analysis during design, solar panels, biodiverse roofs, bat/bird boxes, sensory garden, naturally ventilated desig n, 
efficient window design and shading, BMS system, cycle parking, electrical charging point on sit e for school buses, reduced car 
parking, presence detection on lighting, window design to increase daylight factor;  
• Drainage Planning Condition to reduce flood risk;   
• School Travel Plan targets 74% sustainable mode for Students, 83% sustainable mode for s taff;  
• Low impact construction.  
School Minor Works Programme: replacement of less energy efficient materials, plant, systems, products, etc. with more effici ent modern 
alternatives, including: replacement of fluorescent tubes with LED equivalents, insula tion for heating pipework/plant, insulation of roofs, 
replacement of single glazed windows with double glazed equivalents, installing more sophisticated BMSs.  
1.5 
Using our 
financial 
decision -
making to 
drive change  The Pension Investment Committee has com missioned an independent carbon footprint analysis of our equity holdings, which make up 
just over half of the fund’s assets. The results of this analysis are being used to direct future choices. Councillors have u ndertaken an 
assessment of low -carbon equi ty funds to understand the types of mandates available in the market, with the expectation that we will 
transition our existing equity mandates into low carbon equivalents in early to mid -2020. Our actuaries are carrying out the fund’s 
triennial valuation.  The results are expected in early 2020. The results of the valuation will determine the fund’s risk and return 
parameters for the next three years  setting an investment strategy that will include the extent to which the fund can transition into low 
carbon  and renewable asset classes. Councillors are developing a climate change policy with the fund’s advisers which will formally outline 
the fund’s objectives and implementation approach for mitigating climate risk.  
 
                                                           
16 http://councilmeetings.lewisham.gov.uk/documents/s45163/Streetlighting%20dimming%20and%20Res ponse%20to%20SDSC.pdf   15 
  
 
Leading By E xample : future a ctions  
 
Objective  Action  Timeframe/cost/owner  
1.1 
Delivering 
organisational 
culture 
change  1.1.1   
The Council’s Executive Management Team to oversee delivery of the Climate 
Emergency Action Plan  with an annual update report to Mayor and Cabinet.  2020/21  
£ 
Chief E xecutive  
1.1.2  
Publish an annual ‘Corporate Use of Resources’ statement setting out performance in 
relation to corporate carbon emissions, energy consumption, water, waste & 
recycling, paper use, staff travel, procurement, IT (information technology) and  other 
environmental indicators.  2020/21  
£ 
Executive Director (ED) for Housing, Environment and 
Regeneration  
1.1.3  
New programme of climate/ carbon literacy training to be rolled out to staff and 
additional focus on Climate Emergency and carbon literacy in induction for new staff. 
Use the Staff Climate Forum to identify further opportunities for engagement.  Short term  
££ 
ED for Housing, Environment and Regeneration  
1.1.4  
New policy of only vegan food served at events on corporate sites.  
 2020/21  
£ 
ED fo r Housi ng, Environment and Regeneration  
1.1.5  
Review further op portunities to eliminate single -use plastic from across the Council’s 
operations in line with t he Council corporate commitment, including ending single -
use plastics at events.  2020/21  
£ 
ED fo r Housing, Environment and Regeneration  
1.1.6  
Develop a strategic approach to reducing deliveries and servicing vehicles to and from 
Council buildings, including restricting delivery times to certain hours, learning from 
good practice elsewhere such as t he model being used by Guys and St Thomas 
hospital at the Deptford Consolidation Centre.  Medium term  
??££  
Chief Finance Officer  / Service Group Manager (SGM)  
Asset Strategy & Technical Support  
1.1.7  
Review and reshape the current internal Climate Emergen cy Working Group to fit 
with delivery of the Action Plan.  2020/21  
£ 
ED for Housing, Environment and Regeneration  
1.2 
Carbon 
neutral 1.2.1  Medium term  
??££  
Director of Regeneration & Place  16 
 corporate 
buildings  Our aim is to be carbon neutral in terms of our corporate emissions by 2030, with an 
interim target of reducing carbon emissions from our corporate buildings by 50% by 
2025 against the 2017/18 baseline.  
1.2.2  
Set out a detailed programme, including milestones, for carbon management in the 
Council’s S trategic Asset Management Plan to 2025.  Short term  
£ (total cost of delivery unknown)  
Director of Regeneration & Place  
1.2.3  
Embed the aspiration to be carbon neutral into the Catford Regeneration Masterplan 
with an aim for the Council’s main corporate centre to achieve a DEC A rating.  Short term  
??££  
SGM for Capital Programme Delivery  
1.2.4  
Complete an estate lifecycle programme for 80 Council -owned sites to inform the 
Strategic Asset Management Plan.  Outputs will identify works in relation to heating , 
insulation, lighting, windows and other energy related measures.  Short term  
££ (total cost of works unknown)  
Service Group Manager (SGM) for Capital Programme 
Delivery  
1.2.5  
Deliver lighting upgrades and improvements to heating, ventilation and air 
conditioning in the Old Town Hall, Civic Suite, Catford Library and customer service 
centre in 20/21.  2020/21  
£££  
SGM for Capital Programme Delivery  
1.2.6  
Review the applicability of ISO 50001:2018 Energy Management System standard as a 
means to drive i mprove ments in energy efficiency.  Short term  
£ 
SGM for Asset Strategy & Technical Support  
1.2.7  
Build capacity in our capital delivery team in relation to energy and carbon reduction.  Short term  
£ 
SGM for Capital Programme Delivery  
1.2.8  
Explore new f unding mechanisms to use the savings from reduced energy 
consumption to fund the upfront capital costs of works.  Short term  
£ 
Director of Regeneration & Place  
1.2.9  
Review water consumption across the corporate estate.  Identify and publish targets 
to im prove performance as part of the annual use of resources statement described 
in 1.1.2.  2020/21  
££ 
SGM for Asset Strategy & Technical Support  
1.2.10  
Complete remaining EPC surveys for the 270 sites in the commercial portfolio and 
assessment against the requirements of the Minimum Energy Efficiency Standards.  Short term  
££ 
SGM for Asset Strategy & Technical Support  
1.2.11  Short term  
??££  
SGM for Asset Strategy & Technical Support  17 
 Ensure compliance by 2023 with the Minimum Energy Efficiency Standards (MEES) 
legislation in relation to those commercial propertie s identified as falling below EPC E 
(currently 25 out of 170 EPCs).  
1.2.12  
Identify the actions needed to bring the commercial estate up to EPC Band C by 2025 
including opportunities as commerci al property leases come up for renewal  to 
implement ‘green leases’ that  incorporates incentives into the lease to operate and 
manage premises  in a sustainable way .  Short term  
£ (unknown cost of subsequent actions)  
SGM for Asset Strategy & Technical Suppo rt  
1.3 
Reducing 
carbon 
intensity of 
service 
delivery  
 
 
 1.3.1  
Upgrade the basement at Laurence House to remove all car spaces except essential 
users and improve facilities for cyclists.  Short term  
£££ 
ED for Housing, Environment and Regeneration  
1.3.2  
Renew  the corporate bus fleet with 40 new vehicles all with the latest Euro 6 engines.  2020/21  
£££ 
Director of Environment  
1.3.3  
Upgrade the HGV fleet to Euro 6 standards including all 25 street cleansing and refuse 
vehicles.  2020/21  
£££ 
Director of En vironment  
1.3.4  
Install 4 new electric vehicle charging points at the Council’s Wearside depot.   Short term  
£££ 
Director of Environment  
1.3.5  
Review opportunities for trial of a fully electric 1.5 tonne van and a fully electric 
refuse vehicle.  2020/21  
££ 
Director of Environment  
1.3.6  
Set a baseline for current staff travel by transport mode. Promote active travel and 
the use of public transport as the default option for all work journeys except where 
there is a legitimate reason.  Extend use of team oyster cards and for journeys where 
vehicle is unavoidable use of electric pool cars.  Seek to gain accredited status in 
relation to green staff travel.   2020/21  
£ 
Director of Human Resources / SGM Highways & 
Transport  
1.3.7  
Embed our response to the cl imate crisis into corporate service planning.  2020/21  
£  
ED for Housing, Environment and Regeneration  / 
Director of Human Resources   
1.3.8  
Work with the Council’s PFI provider Skanska to review opportunities to convert 
Lewisham streetlights to LED.  Mediu m term  
£££ 
Director for Regeneration & Place  18 
 1.3.9  
Prioritise the procurement and use of electric tools rather than petrol in the parks 
service.  Short term  
££ 
Director of Environment  
1.3.10  
Identify opportunities to reduce the carbon intensity of our resurfacing work 
including increased use of ‘warm mix’ and work with the regional officers group, The 
London Technical Advisers Group (LoTag), to identify and integrate best practice into 
highway management in Lewisham.   2020/21  
££ 
SGM Highways and Transp ort 
1.3.11  
Review the Council’s outdoor events and identify opportunities to remove avoidable 
carbon emissions, for example replacing diesel generators with zero carbon 
alternatives.  2020/21  
££ 
Director of Culture and Community Development  
1.3.12  
Deve lop and implement a new document retention policy that minimises hard copy 
printing and replaces physical storage with scanned copies and standardised 
approaches to retaining and destroying records to minimise storage requirements.  
Extend the use of onlin e and electronic processes to replace paper, for example in 
relation to pay slips.  2020/21  
££ 
Director of IT and Digital Services  
1.3.13  
Carry out an energy and carbon audit of all Corporate IT functions.  2020/21  
££ 
Director of IT and Digital Services / Director of 
Regeneration & Place  
1.3.14  
Review planting schemes outside corporate buildings to reduce the use of short term 
plants chosen for appearances and promote the use of plants with greater climate 
adaptation resilience and biodiversity benefits particularly for bees, moths, butterflies 
and other pollinators . 2020/21  
??££  
SGM Green Scene  
1.4 
Improvements 
across schools  
 1.4.1  
Support schools in accessing SALIX funding and other sources of external resources to 
improve the energy efficiency of build ings and generate onsite renewable energy.  Short term  
£ 
SGM for Capital Programme Delivery  
1.4.2  
Work towards achieving new higher energy standards for schools with the aim for 
new schools to be DEC A and refurbished schools DEC B.  Medium term  
??££  
Director of Regeneration & Place  
1.4.3  
Support efforts by school staff and pupils to take action on climate change. Put 
proposals for joined up activity and shared resources to the Schools Forum in 2020 2020/21  
£ 19 
 including the scope for increasing climate literacy i n school, for example by having a 
climate c hange trained teacher in every school. Help schools create their own carbon 
actions plans.  Director of Regeneration & Place / Director of 
Education Services  
1.4.4  
Develop new carbon reduction targets for new school designs in the Project 
Implementation Document (PID) stage and Employer Requirements (ERs) of capital 
works.  Short  term  
??££  
Director of Regeneration & Place  
1.4.5  
Undertake an audit of schools’ energy performance designed to share good p ractice 
and learn lessons that can be integrated into corporate standards.  2020/21  
££ 
SGM for Capital Programme Delivery  
1.4.6  
Assess further improvements to the catering service including:  
• An additional meat free day per week;  
• Increasing the number o f vegan options;  
• Future options for procuring the school catering service including insourcing, 
seeking opportunities to promote local produce, reduce  food miles and offer 
more seasonal menus.  2020/21  
£ 
Regeneration & Place / Director of Education Service s  
1.4.7  
Trial food waste collection for school classrooms in 2020 year to assess the potential 
to roll out for all school kitchens.  Review and  identify opportunities for further 
reductions in waste from schools.  2020/21  
££ 
Director of Environment  
1.5 
Using our 
financial 
decision -
making to 
drive change  1.5.1  
Agree and implement a new strategy for divesting the Pension Fund  from high -carbon 
investments.  2020/21  
£ 
Chief Finance Officer  
1.5.2 
Review and update existing procurement and social value pol icies to strengthen the 
value placed on life -cycle assessment, support the circular economy and reduce 
carbon emissions across our supply chain.  We will assess the introduction of 
requirements in our contracts for contractors to publicly report their corp orate 
carbon emissions, and including CO2e emissions relating to the good and services we 
procure as performance metrics in contracts.   We will assess the scope to improve the 
standards in contractor fleet vehicles.  We will assess scope for Council Inform ation 
Technology contracts to adopt the highest standards of efficiency and environmental 
performance including whole lifecycle costs.  2020/21  
£ / implementation cost unknown  
Chief Finance Officer  
1.5.3  Short term  
??££  20 
 Explore opportunities for a revolving fund that w ill deliver carbon reduction projects 
and recoup money through energy savings.  Chief Finance Officer  
1.5.4  
Explore partnerships with funders for new carbon reduction infrastructure projects 
that deliver local value and potential return on  investment.  Long term  
??££  
Chief Finance Officer  
1.5.5  
Use the Council’s corporate energy procurement to support renewable energy, 
develop an energy procurement strategy that aligns our Climate Emergency 
ambitions with the way we procure energy contrac ts.     2020/21  
££ 
Chief Finance Officer  
 
 
  21 
  
 
Leading B y Example : our asks of others  
 
Cuts to local government funding over the last decade have been described as ‘unparalleled in modern times’17.  If the Government is serious about delivering on 
its own  climate change commitments it needs to recognise the important role that local government can play and reverse this systematic reduction in capacity.  
Despite the pressures they face local authorities have enthusiastically rallied behind the Climate Emerg ency campaign but without resources the sector is 
struggling to deliver statutory services.  Government must make significant investment in local authority funding generally , and specifically in relation to action on 
climate change.  Her Majesty’ s Treasury  (HMT) /  Ministry of Housing Communities and Local Government (MHCLG) / Department of Business Energy and Industrial 
Strategy (BEIS)  
 
The Government’s proposed Shared Prosperity Fund should have carbon reduction embedded within it and should be used as a w ay to lever in private sector 
funding to deliver of national, regional and local ambitions for carbon reduction in housing, transport and green infrastruct ure and should be used to tackle 
inequality in relation to the impact of climate change and delivery of UK target to be net zero carbon.  Her Majesty’s Treasury (HMT)  
 
There should be alignment between the priorities for DfE and BEIS when it comes to funding for capital works to schools , whereas currently there is often pressure 
to value engineer projects  to avoid higher standards . DfE should own and champion higher energy standards and see this as integral to the quality required in 
building refurbishments and new build.  The Department for Education (DfE)  
 
Government should provide more g uidance and good  practice in relation to what it means for a school to be carbon neutral and how this can be delivered.  BEIS  / 
DfE / MHCLG  
 
The Government should incentivise the take up of renewables and purchase of renewable energy contracts for the public sector .  HMT / BEIS  
 
The Government should act to stop the terms ‘Carbon neutral’ and ‘Net zero carbon’ being discredited through unaccredited and  meaningless so -called carbon 
offset schemes.  The Government should legislate to prevent bogus marketing claims of zero ca rbon, introduce clear and meaningful standards that ensure 
additionality and set up a watchdog to enforce standards . This could potentially be a new duty for Ofgem (see also ask in housing section).   HMT / BEIS  
 
 
  
                                                           
17 https://publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201719/cmselect/cmcomloc/2036/203605.htm   22 
  
Sustainable H ousing : our ambition and t he challenge we face  
 
City living is low carbon living. Higher densities of housing provide a sufficient population to support extensive and divers e public transport, and shorter distances 
of travel promote walking and cycling.  Government data on carbon e missions identifies Lewisham as having the second lowest per capita carbon emissions in the 
country18.   But Lewisham, along with the rest of London, is facing an unprecedented housing crisis. There are not enough genuinely af fordable homes for those 
who ne ed them. The cost of housing has increased, incomes have not kept pace and welfare reform has left many households struggling . Lewisham’s corporate 
plan and draft housing strategy make a firm commitment to genuinely affordable housing.  Low running costs a re essential to futureproof genuinely affordable 
housing.   
 
Our trajectory research tells us that domestic gas is the largest single source of carbon emissions in the borough and this w ill need significant investment to 
address.  But large parts of the ho using stock in the borough was built in an era when coal was the primary source of heating. Older, draughty, inefficient home s 
cost more to heat and Government statistics show that  over 13,000  Lewisham households (11%) fall below the threshold for fuel pov erty, and are unable to keep 
their home warm enough. Living in a cold and damp home is proven to increase  the risk of ill health, premature death , reduce educational attainment and is a 
miserable and isolating experience for those affected . We face signifi cant challenges in raising standards in housing,  but this must be addressed as the majority of 
existing housing stock will remain in use in 2030  and beyond.  
 
Lewisham Homes manages 19,000 homes in the borough on behalf of the Council. These are often buil dings with lower energy efficiency standards which are 
expensive to retrofit.   A stock wide assessment will inform a new asset management strategy that will seek to drive widespread improvements. This inc ludes 
cutting residents’ energy bills and decarboni sing the housing stock and the way their services are run. Achieving this will have its challenges, with funding the key 
challenge, particularly where this may result in increased service charges.  
 
One in four residents in Lewisham live in the private ren ted sector, and around half  own their own home. Lewisham’s Private Sector Housing Agency runs 
programmes and interventions to manage and improve the private rented sector  in the borough . This includes  targeted enforcement against rogue landlords, the 
issui ng of landlord licenses,  bringing empty homes back into use  and financial support through grants and loans to adapt homes for vulnerable people’s changing 
needs. This borough -wide programme has an important role to play in driving improvement in what is of ten the poorest quality housing.  
 
London has experienced a period of rapid growth and this is expected to continue, with projections estimating a 19% populatio n growth between 2017 and 2040. 
Our new local plan recognises the severe and enduring implication s of climate change and is intended to create a clear framework for Lewisham to co ntribute to 
meeting the UK’s  net zero carbon target.   Our ambition is to deliver new genuinely -affordable housing that meets high standards for energy and carbon.  
 
While Lond on’s economy makes it one of the largest in the world19 this wealth is not distributed evenly and large numbers of households struggle to meet the cost 
of staying warm , often living in very difficult circumstances and at risk of ill health .  Government stat istics on fuel poverty estimate that 10.9% of Lewisham 
                                                           
18 https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/uk -local -authority -and-regional -carbon -dioxide -emissions -national -statistics .  
19 https://www.ons.gov.uk/economy/grossdomesticproductgdp/bulletins/regionaleconomicactivitybygrossdomesticproductuk/1998to2018/ pdf  23 
 households, over 13,000 , are living in fuel poverty .  Lewisham Council has been providing support to vulnerable residents helping people stay warm in winter since 
2007. In 2018/19 the Council worked wi th Bexley, Bromley, Greenwich and Southwark to expand the service to south east London, and in 2019/20 initiated the 
South London Energy Efficiency Partnership covering the 12 boroughs in south London.  
 
New systems and technology will be an essential part  of the drive to cut carbon but they have to work for the people that use them, and not result in higher bills 
for those  already struggling to make ends meet. There has been a lack of clarity at a national level between the drive to decarbonise heat and th e approach to 
supporting those at risk of fuel poverty.  We are clear that delivery of a low carbon Lewisham must not result in greater numbers facing unaffordable energy bills . 
 
Lewisham’s Housing Select  Committee undertook an in -depth review of communal heating systems in 2014/15 as a result of issues raised by residents . This review 
made a number of recommendations to central government and social housing providers reflecting the problems that had been exp erienced by residents living in 
properties served  by communal heating.  Changes to the way communal heating is regulated have improved customer protection and standards  but more could 
and should be done . The broader lesson from examples where communal heating has not worked is that policy implementation must be based on actual 
performance and not unreliable predictions .  
 
The South East London Combined Heat and Power facility (SELCHP) represents one of the big opportunities in the borough as a s ource of low carbon heating. 
SELCHP generates energy from a w aste plant for use across a network in South East London  that could serve 50,000 homes . The main challenge in extending the 
heat network from SELCHP into Lewisham has historically been crossing several railway lines  but i n 2020 Veolia who own and operate S ELCHP were awarded 
£5.5m funding through the central government Heat Network Investment Programme (HNIP)  to initiate a heat network in Lewisham through a new connection to 
3,500 new homes  in the north of the borough . The Council is working with Veolia to s upport the development of this work with a view to establishing a strategic 
heat network for the borough.  
 
 
  24 
  
Sustainable Housing : what we have done  
  
Objective  Actions  
2.1  
Delivering c arbon 
reduction through 
Lewisham Homes’ 
built environment  Standard Employer’s Requirements and Design Guide ensure all Council -led new build schemes strive for the highest sustainability 
standards : 
• All new homes achieve a SA P rating of at least 85 (EPC B);   
• Building Regulations Part L: Conservation of fuel and power and P art F: Ventilation;  
• GLA London Plan  and Lewisham’s Local Plan . 
Complet ion of Longfield Crescent and Dacre Park North  schemes with PV panels, sprinklers and water fittings with low flow rates installed.  
50 % waste storage is allocated to recycling and  skips are provi ded to manage waste durin g the moving period.  
PLACE/ Ladywell constructed with modern methods of construction and electric radiators are installed.  
2.2 
Mainstreaming 
carbon reduction 
into the Lewisham 
Homes’ business 
model  New recycling facilities in corporate offices . 
Residents engaged through a “Climate Boot Camp ” held in 2019  to raise awareness and generate ideas.  
Beef and lamb banned from Lewisham Homes’ corporate catering.  
A Climate Emergency Leadership Group formed to work wit h the Council with capacity added through a new Sustainability Manager post . 
60 wildflower mead ows and bee corridors created on estate parks  with 40 more planned for 2020/21.  
2.3 
Raising standards 
across all tenures  We have agreed plans to e xtend the current licensing scheme for all Houses of Multiple Occupation ( HMOs ) across the b orough  and to 
apply to the Secretary o f State for approval for a borough -wide licencing scheme . 
We work with landlords and social housing providers to provide updates on a br oad range of strategic housing issues including the 
Minimum Energy Efficiency Standards, grants and other opportunities on energy efficiency and low carbon technology.  
2.4 
Provide practical 
support to 
residents  
vulnerable to the 
cold  In 2018/19 Lewisha m Council led a partnership with four other south east London boroughs (Bexley, Bromley, Greenwich and Southwark), 
local community organisations to deliver a coordinated 5 borough fuel poverty project, offering practical advice through home  visits and 
even ts across south east London to over 1,000 residents with 450 home visits delivered. In 19/20 the Council accessed further fun ding to 
expand the service to the whole of south London.  
Up to the end of March 2019 the Council helped 464 vulnerable household s in south east London access funding for heating, ventilation 
and insulation with over £600,000 value of measures installed in the five boroughs.  
We have included our work on Climate Emergency  into the work programme of Lewisham’s Corporate Equalities B oard.  
2.5 
Low carbon 
growth  
 The current Local Plan includes a suite of strategic and detailed policies on Sustainable Design and Construction and Energy Efficiency. 
These are considered alongside the relevant London Plan policies for planning decisions.  They reflect the council’s aim to minimise overall 
carbon dioxide emissions from new development, including housing. All major development proposals are required to submit a 
Sustainability Statement and Energy Statement to demonstrate how they will satisf y the policy requirements.  25 
  Major development proposals will be required to achieve a minimum on -site reduction of at least 35 per cent (beyond the baseline of Part 
L) of the current Building Regulations.  They should also calculate and minimise emissions  from any other part of the development that are 
not covered by Building Regulations (i.e. unregulated emissions).  
2.6 
Decarbonising 
heat  In 2018 Lewisham and Veolia signed a Memorandum of Understanding20 to work in partnership to develop opportunities fo r heat 
networks in the borough, and we have delivered two central government funded feasibility studies to assess potential heat net works from 
SELCHP.  In 2020 Veolia received £5.5m funding from central government to build a heat network to connect waste h eat from the South 
East London Combined Heat and Power (SELCHP) facility  to 3,500 homes in the north of the borough .   
Major development proposals within heat network priority areas are expected to have a communal low -temperature heating system. The 
heat  source is prioritised based on the following hierarchy:  
• Connect to local ex isting of planned heat networks;  
• Use zero -emission or local secondary heat sources;  
• Use low -emission combined heat and power (CHP) where there is a case for CHP to deliver an area -wide heat network.  
• Use ultra -low NOx gas boilers.  
 
Where CHP and ultra -low NOx gas boiler systems are the only solution and are acceptable in line with air quality and other policies the 
system is expected to be designed to future -proof and enable decarbon isation of the site -wide communal network through integration of 
new technology at a later date.  
Lewisham’s Housing Select Committee undertook a scrutiny review of communal heating systems in 2014/15 as a result of issues raised by 
residents in social h ousing properties served by communal heating. The Review was based around the question: “How can the Council 
help to ensure the effective deployment of communal heating systems in the borough, where appropriate?”.  The Committee’s 
recommendations were refe rred to Mayor and Cabinet in July 2015 and the response from officers agreed by the Mayor in September 
201521 
 
 
  
                                                           
20 http://councilmeetings.lewisham.gov.uk/ieDecisionDetails.aspx?AIId=19788   
21 Housing Select Committee review into communal heating http://councilmeetings.lewisham.gov.uk/documents/s36591/05AppendixACHSRevisedReportv2_190515.pdf   
Response to the Housing Select Committee review http://councilmeetings.lewisham.gov.uk/documents/s38782/Response%20to%20SDSC%20Communal%20Heating%20Review.pdf   
 26 
  
Sustainable Housing : future actions  
 
Objective  Action  Timeframe/cost/owner  
2.1  
Delivering carbon 
reduction 
through 
Lewisham 
Homes’ built 
environment  
 2.1.1   
Deliver a new Asset Management Strategy that sets out a new ambition for  energy and carbon 
performance across the Lewisham Homes’ stock including : 
 The requirements of  achiev ing a minimum of SAP 86 EPC B across the Lewisham Homes stock. ;  
 Ensuring n ew build developments comply with existing and emerging local and national policy and 
legislation  including SAP10.1 methodology ( and future upgrades of SAP);  
 Includes a focus on improving property ventilation ;  
 Sets out an option appraisal  on p oorly performing properties . 2020/21  
£ (cost of works unknown)  
Lewisham Homes  
2.1.2  
Develop a new strategic approach to decarbonising heating across the stock with the aim of centralising 
plant and creating opportunities for heat networks. Assess the opp ortunities and risks of technologies 
such as heat pumps, and improvements to existing electric heating systems and storage heaters 
identify the optimum approach to boiler replacements.  2020/21  
££ (cost of works unknown)  
Lewisham Homes  
2.1.3  
Raise standa rds in existing communal heating systems, ensuring compliance with regulation and 
installing metering and improved controls to systems.  Develop a planned maintenance and investment 
plan that is informed by the emerging strategic approach to decarbonising heating across the stock.  Short term  
£££  
Lewisham Homes  
2.1.4  
Review procurement policies to increase the s ustainability of major works , including selecting lower 
carbon materials and r eusing structures and construction materials where possible . Short term  
£  
Lewisham Homes  
2.1.5  
Delivery within the Lewisham Home’s major works programme of cladding  improvements that deliver 
improved thermal efficiency combined with the highest standards of building safety.  Medium term  
££££  
Lewisham Homes  
2.1.6  
Review and identify the financial, technical, operational and resident satisfaction implications of 
delivering a new homes programme to a   carbon neutral standard, to include a understanding of:  
 Building new homes to Passive House Standards (achieving a SAP rating of 92 -100/EPC A);  
 Delivering Energiesprong or similar retrofits;  
 Early adoption of no gas ; 
 Meeting the new LETI (London Energy Transformat ion Initiative) design standard.   
 Short term  
££ for assessment  
Cost of implementation unknown  
Lewisham Homes  27 
 Use the outcomes form the assessment to push central government and others f or additional funding, 
investment in new technology, regulatory change and other actions that will enable this to be delivered 
in Lewisham.    
2.1.7  
Implement lessons learned from  good practice elsewhere and the assessment in 2.1.6 into delivery on a 
scheme -by scheme basis including in relation to : 
 the use of pre -manufactured elements;  
 air/ ground source heat pumps;  
 district heat networks;  
 mechanical ventilation heat recovery (MV HR) units;  
 alternative fuels and battery storage;  
 energy efficient heating including underfloor;  
 external shading devices;  
 decentralised heating;  
 green / living roofs and walls;  
 sustainable drainage;  
 AECB (Association of Environmentally Conscious Builders ) standards;  
 waste water heat recovery systems;  
 smart water use;  
 procurement and sourcing all materials and products from within 30 mile radius of site . Medium term  
££££  
Lewisham Homes  
2.1.8  
Evaluate the application of the ‘Soft Landings Framework’ to new build projects.  Short term  
££  
Director of Regeneration & Place 
/ Lewisham Homes  
2.2 
Mainstreaming 
carbon reduction 
into the 
Lewisham 
Homes’ business 
model  
 2.2.1  
Publish a Lewisham Homes to Sustainability Strategy document setting out an overarching approach to 
carbon reduction aligned to the Lewisham Homes’ Asset Management Strategy.  Set out baseline 
environmental performance metrics  2020/21  
£  
Lewisham Homes  
2.2.2  
Develop a sustainable w orking protocol for LHL employees, to include:  
• Sustainable staff travel policy, recycling, office etiquette ; 
• An updated Employee Code of Conduct ; 
• Encourag ing vegan cateri ng, local sourcing of supplies;  
• A ban on single -use plastic except where there’s a specific health and safety reason . 2020/21  
£  
Lewisham Homes  
2.2.3   
Ensure the Old Town Hall refurbishment promotes a sustainable office environment, including  Short term  
£££  28 
  Agile working ;  
 Improved cycling facilities and ch anging rooms ;  
 A paperless environment;  
 Install ation of smart and energy efficient products such as LED li ghting, smart meters and water 
meters . Lewisham Homes  
2.2.4  
Incrementally upgrade the Lewisham Homes’ fleet  to low emission combustion and hybrid with the aim 
of becoming fully powered by renewable electricity as soon as is practicable . Short term  
£££  
Lewisham Homes  
2.2.5  
Recruit 100 resident ‘Eco -Champions’ . 2020/21  
£ 
Lewisham Homes  
2.2.6  
Develop a draft Sustainable Es tate Parks and Gardens strategy.  
 2020/21  
£  
Lewisham Homes  
2.3 
Raising standards 
across all tenures  
 2.3.1  
Assess t he actions and investment needed to get all domestic buildings in the borough to an average of 
EPC Band B and d evelop more sophisticated methods of identifying which properties are energy 
inefficient , targeting resource where there will be most impact.  Short term  
££ 
Director of Housing Services  
2.3.2  
Inspect all HMOs (house in multiple occupation) in the borough over 5 years , an estimated 6,000  
properties , as part of the HMO expanded licensing scheme . Inspections will focus on the  eradication of 
category  1 and 2 hazards on cold and thermal efficiency, especially for vulnerable residents.  Short term  
£££ 
Director of Housing Services  
2.3.3  
Apply to th e Secretary of State for a borough -wide  licensing scheme  with the intention of rolling out 
licensing to al l 26,000 privately rented properties. Inspections of these properties will be conducted on 
a risk basis  including analysis of potential poor standards in the stock , with a particular focus on damp 
and cold.  Short term  
£££  
Director of Housing Services  
2.3.4 
Explore the potential to provide a discount on the licence fee if the landlord takes the EPC rating of 
their property to C or above and assess whether further discounts could apply for ratings above C.  Short term  
££  
Director of Housing Services  
2.3.5 
Use the Council’s online presence such as web pages and social media to promote energy efficiency 
advice to landlords.  Short term  
£ 
Director of Housing Services  
2.3.6  
Take enforcement  under the Domestic Minimum Energy Efficiency Standards Regulation , which allow 
us to issue a Community Protection Notice ( CPN ) for renting accommodation under an EPC rating of E.  Ongoing  
£££ 
Director of Housing Services  29 
 2.3.7  
Engage with landlord accreditation schemes that promote energy efficiency.   Short term  
£ 
Director of Housing Services  
2.38  
Ensure all accommodation used as temporary accommodation by the Council meets  the Minimum 
Energy Efficiency Standards including the current requirement for  EPC rating E or above and has all the 
required gas and electrical c ertification . Short term  
£££ 
Director of Housing Services  
2.3.9  
Support a new  PRS renters ’ union across the sector  to provide a forum for renters; allowing us to raise 
awareness of the Climate Emergency and measures to tackle it and the union to flag up specific 
concerns to be addressed  Short term  
£ 
Director of Housing Services  
2.3.10  
Develop a programme to target high risk streets and neighbourhoods with tailored advice including the 
publication and promotion of initiatives.  Short term  
££ 
Director of  Housing Services  
2.3.11   
Develop the use of discretionary grant to support home owners. Roll out an active campaign to use this 
grant to improve energy standards in those properties that require it most.  2020/21  
£ 
Director of Housing Services  
2.3.12  
Actively p articipate in a pan -London ‘Setting the Standard’ initiative that will support inspections of the 
worst standard of accommodation B&Bs, working to support enforcement action taken in Lewisham 
and other borough s to drive up property standards.  Shor t term  
£ 
Director of Housing Services  
2.3.13   
Introduce new technology and approaches to identifying cold houses , such as external surveying tools 
or internal monitoring equipment and  including  collaboration with a MHCLG funded Greenwich pilot . Short te rm  
££ 
Director of Housing Services  
2.3.14  
Work with the GLA, London Councils and other London Boroughs to support the development of an 
offer to ‘able to pay’ home owners to increase home retrofit projects and to build trust and a joined -up 
approach in the supply chain to promote and respond to demand for home retrofits, such as affordable 
and independent whole -house audits.  Short term  
£ 
Director of Housing Services / 
Director of Regeneration & Place  
2.3.15  
Explore potential for working with local com munity organisations to support bulk purchasing schemes 
that reduce the costs to homeowners of home energy improvements.  Short term  
Medium cost  
Director of Housing Services /  
Director of Regeneration & Place  
2.3.16  
Investigate ways to ensure Lewisham gr ants are advertised on the government ‘save energy’ platform 
and promote the schemes available through the platform to residents.  Short term  
£ 
Director of Housing Services  30 
 2.3.17  
Apply minimum insulation and efficiency standards to works undertaken at ho meowners’ properties.  2020/21  
£ (incl. within service delivery)  
Director of Housing Services  
2.3.18  
Engage local registered social providers to encourage sharing of practice on carbon reduction and 
supporting all RPs to take meaningful action in relation  to their stock in the borough.  2020/21  
£ 
Director of Housing Services  
2.3.19  
Officers within the Private Sector Housing Agency team will use public transport for all routine 
inspections.  2020/21  
No/low cost  
Director of Housing Services  
2.4 
Provide  
practical support 
to vulnerable 
residents to say 
warm and well  2.4.1  
Expansion of the South London Energy Efficiency Project led by Lewisham, providing practical support 
to vulnerable residents in south London.  Support 1,600 households in 2019/20.  Seek exte rnal funding 
and partnerships to deliver the same in 2020/21.  2020/21  
£££ 
ED Housing, Environment and 
Regeneration / Director of Public 
Health  
2.4.2  
Support low income and vulnerable residents in accessing external sources of funding for heating, 
insulat ion and ventilation.  2020/21  
££ 
ED Housing, Environment and 
Regeneration / Director of Public 
Health  
2.4.3  
Undertake an assessment of the equalities implications of climate change and of the actions at 
national, regional and local level to reduce carbon and work with partners to find additional ways to 
support affected groups to mitigate the impact.  Review the use of the Climate Just22 tool to understand 
the impact across different communities in the borough.  2020/21  
££ 
ED Housing, Environment and 
Regener ation  
2.5 
Support zero 
carbon growth  
 
 2.5.1  
Adopt a new Local Plan for the borough with Climate Emergency embedded within the document and 
development management policies supporting delivery of the ambition to be carbon neutral including 
achieving the Lo ndon Plan policy for major developments to be zero carbon.  We will seek that 
proposals for new self -contained major and minor residential development achieve the BRE Home 
Quality Mark and that proposals for major residential domestic refurbishment achieve  a certified 
‘Excellent’ rating under the BREEAM Domestic Refurbishment 2014 scheme, or future equivalent; and 
that proposals for new non -residential development of 500 square metres gross floor space or more, 
including mixed -use development, achieve an ‘E xcellent’ rating under the BREEAM New Construction 
(Non -Domestic Buildings) 2018 scheme, or future equivalent. We will seek that development proposals 2020/21  
£ (excludes staffing)  
Director of Planning  
                                                           
22 https://www.climatejust.org.uk/  31 
 for major non -residential refurbishment, including mixed -use development, achieve a certified 
‘Excellent’  rating under the BREEAM Non -Domestic Refurbishment scheme, or future equivalent.  
2.5.2  
Monitor and report on the transition to a carbon neutral b orough  through implementation of the new 
Local Plan throu gh the Authority Monitoring Report process  to regularly assess performance against 
our s trategic planning objectives.  2020/21  
£ 
Director of Planning  
2.5.3  
Ensure that developments which cannot meet onsite carbon targets comply with policy through 
payment  into Lewisham’s carbon offset fund23.  The Fund will be used to drive local innovation and 
investment in ways that meet our objective to ensure our Climate Emergency responds to the needs of 
vulnerable residents.  Annex B sets out further details of the ap proach we propose.  Short term  
£ (excludes staffing)  
Director of Planning / Director of 
Regeneration & Place  
2.6 
Decarbonising 
heat  2.6.1  
Work with Veolia to implement the joint memorandum of understanding agreed with the Council to 
deliver opportunities to utilise unused heat from the SELCHP facility to supply local homes.  Short term  
??££  
Director of Regeneration & Place  
2.6.2   
Work with Lewisham Homes to evaluate the potential for connecting properties to a network supplied 
with heat from SELCHP.  Short term  
??££  
Director of Regeneration & Place 
/ Lewisham Homes  
2.6.3   
Carry out a borough -wide energy masterplanning study to assess opportunities for clusters of heat 
demand and identify the potential low carbon solutions to meeting that demand.  This m asterplan will 
inform planning guidance, development of the Council’s new build housing programme and 
refurbishment plans for the C ouncil’s existing housing. The m asterplan will be completed in 2020.  2020/21  
££  
Director of Regeneration & Place  
2.6.4  
Use new development management policies from the Local Plan and the borough -wide masterplanning 
to direct new connections and support viability of new heat networks.  Short term  
£ 
Director of Planning  
 
  
  
                                                           
23 https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct= j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&ved=2ahUKEwjlls7Zm6TnAhUVi1wKHbVMAgEQFjAAegQIAxAB&url=https%3A%2F%2Flewisham.gov.uk%2F -
%2Fmedia%2Ffiles%2Fimported%2Flewishamcarbonoffsetstudy.ashx&usg=AOvVaw0XDWHn85E9zyena9AM7Myx   32 
 Sustainable Housing :  our asks of others  
 
Decarbonis ing heating and hot water is the most significant challenge faced in London in relation to the Climate Emergency.  If the UK Government is serious about 
delivering on its carbon commitments it needs to : 
• Set out a road map for how the Government is planning  to decarb onise heat;  
• Provide clarity on achieving decarbonisation while supporting fuel poor households particularly in this transition period;   
• Offer further practical g uidance on current and emerging non -fossil fuel heating technologies;  
• Make f urther c ommitment s to supporting heat networks particularly using energy from waste ; 
• To include the provision for a statutory regime governing regulation of heat networks to offer the same level of protection f or customers as the rest of the 
energy supply industry  and ensure the most vulnerable are not bearing the brun t of poorly performing systems;  
• To require annual reporting of network performance in a publically accessible format to the local planning authority;   
• Reform the Renewable Heat Incentive so that it in creases support for solar thermal, heat pumps and other clean te chnologies to decarbonise heat;  
• Rule out seeking to access new sources of fossil fuels, for example through fracking.  
Business  Energy and Industrial Strategy (BEIS)  
 
Standards of energy perfo rmance are only meaningful if they correspond to actual performance of buildings and technologies.  This has too frequently been a 
problem, with communal heating and heat networks a particular example affecting low income and vulnerable residents in social  housing. Government  needs to 
ensure that actual rather than predicted performance is the metric used for planning and compl iance with building regulations.   Government should also identify 
resources to improve historic systems that are not working effecti vely to destigmatise the perception that communal heating is an inferior option.  BEIS   
 
Giving consumers real time information is a powerful way to drive changes in home energy use.  The current roll out of smart meters has been woeful and 
Government shou ld take a proper grip of this to  ensure that this is delivered in a way that works for people.   BEIS   
 
There is no direct public funding in England for fuel poor households.  Government needs to end the retrograde approach it ha s taken through the Energy 
Comp any Obligation which places responsibility on energy suppliers who then recharge their customers for the work they do.  This cost adds further disadvanta ges 
to fuel poor households.  Government should instead provide funding through taxation. At presen t funding for fuel poverty is disjointed, short term and 
discourages local partnership working between the public sector and community organisations .  BEIS   
 
Government should  ensure London gets its fair share of funding for fuel poverty.  Despite being th e English region with the second highest number of households 
in fuel poverty London is second to last in relation to levels of funding through the Energy Company Obligation (ECO).  Gover nment should recognise that 
supporting boroughs to work in partnershi p with the community sector is the most cost effective and efficient way to support vulnerable households.  The 
Government needs to work with London and London Boroughs , through and with the Greater London Authority.  BEIS   
 
Government should urgently rethi nk the draft Future Homes Standard and avoid the retrograde step of implementing lower standards for future homes than exist 
now in London, and simultaneously removing the ability of local authorities to set their own standards and therefore drive in novati on.  BEIS   
 33 
 Government should seek to promote whole house energy retrofit actions by home owners including:  
 Reduc e VAT and other taxation  levied on domestic energy efficiency measures and low carbon heating ;  
 Reintroduce the requirement for consequential improvements to raise energy efficiency of the whole property with applications for extentions , 
conservatories, garages  and other similar modifications;  
 Creation of a  national loan scheme to support the upfront costs of retrofitting energy efficiency measu res; 
 Use Building Regulations to future -proof modifications to dwellings so that new technology can be integrated or parts of buildings can be removed and 
reintegrated into the design of new buildings where the existing dwelling is demolished;  
 Create a ne w fund to support skills and training on home retrofit, energy efficiency and low carbon heating .  
HMT / BEIS   
 
The Government’s planned Housing Upgrade Grant should develop area -based approaches working directly with local authorities to maximise take -up and 
integration at a geographical level.  BEIS   
 
Government should give Ofgem a new duty to consider carbon implications of all decision -making in relation to energy suppliers.   BEIS/Ofgem  
 
Government should s upport community energy through fiscal incenti ves including VAT relief on fuel and power costs and social investment tax relief . HMT / BEIS   
 
Local authorities should be given the power to direct National Grid PLC and UK Power Networks to invest in the local electricity network to enable the 
transform ation of heat and road transport that is required.  BEIS/N ational Grid / UKPN  
 
Government should create further incentives and requirements on landlords, particularly those making large profits with no investment placing additional cost to 
the rest of soci ety through impacting on health outcomes and leaving a legacy of hard to heat high carbon properties.  Steps the Government s hould take include:  
 Reintroduc tion of the landlords energy saving allowance and increase the spending threshold to £5,000 ;  
 Increas ing the maximum spend exemption for compliance with the Minimum Energy Efficiency Standard (MEES)  to at least £5,000 .  
BEIS  / Ministry of Housing, C ommunities and Local Government (MHCLG)  
 
Government should e nsure social housing landlords properly understa nd and integrate the roll out of new technologies by establishing additional support for 
social housing including funding for research and development for sustainable technologies in housing retrofit and construction . BEIS   
  
Government should reform the H ome Energy Conservation Act (HECA) so that it more closely focuses on the priorities of carbon reduction and fuel poverty. BEIS   
 
Government should properly account for the embodied energy in buildings and construction in a rigorous and consistent way , and adopt a policy hierarchy that 
advocates circular economy principles for construction particularly in relation to reuse and refurbishment in preference to d emolition and new construction.  BEIS   
 
Government should provide further guidance in relation to pla nning policy for conservation areas to remove barriers to retrofit and renewable energy while 
respecting character and heritage. BEIS   34 
 Decarbonised Transport : our ambition and the challenge we face  
 
Transport represents 25% of the borough’s CO2 emissions and tackling this is a central focus of our transport strategies and programmes. Our ambition is to make 
Lewisham a place where the low carbon choice of travel is the easy choice , and this informs our work to support a transition to a cleaner fleet, encour age modal 
shift and reduce the impact of cars, vans and lorries by managing traffic and parking.  
 
The borough’s policies and strategies align with those set out in the London Mayor’s Transport Strategy (MTS), which has an o verarching aim of reducing 
depen dency on cars and sets a strategic target for 80% of journeys in London to be made by walking, cycling and public transport b y 2041. The MTS is delivered 
through a variety of organisations and partners, including at the borough level through the Council’s Transport Strategy & Local Implementation Plan (LIP). Our LIP 
sets out a three -year programme of investment and identifies the borough’s longer -term aspirations for transport and infrastructure delivery.  
 
Lewisham LIP identified four priority objectives, a ll of which are relevant to the climate change agenda:  
- Travel by sustainable modes will be the most pleasant, reliable and attractive option for those travelling to, from and with Lewisham;  
- Lewisham’s streets will be safe, secure and accessible to all;  
- Lewisham’s streets will be healthy, clean and green with less motor traffic; and  
- Lewisham’s transport network will support new development whilst providing for existing demand.  
 
There is huge potential to increase cycling in Lewisham.  Data tells us that over a quarter of a million journeys in the borough every year are short enough and for 
purposes that could suit using a bicycle, yet 94% of these trips are currently made by other modes.  
 
Lewisham has more residents relying on train s to get to work t han any other inner London borough .  There are a large number of station s and routes across much 
of the borough, but not everywhere, particularly in areas in the southeast and the very north .  Trains are also often crowded and can be unreliable. They are a lso 
comparatively disconnected to other public transport services, with a low proportion of residents commuting by underground, m etro, light rail or tram services . 
Extending the Bakerloo Line into Lewisham is of huge strategic significance for the borough and a key means to delivering a radical shift away from the car.  
 
The borough has 41 bus routes operated by TfL which predominantly link Lewisham to ot her south -eastern boroughs and c entral London , although services in  the 
west of the borough  are less fre quent and connected . Improving accessibility to public transport can contribute greatly to social inclusion, and expand ing London’s 
bus network in London is an important priority for the Council as a means of improving transport provision in areas of highe st need.  
 
Where the car once brought freedom and flexibility, road traffic is now turning London’s air toxic and clogging up our local streets creating barriers to movement. 
Less than half of Lewisham households own a car , but everyone is affected by the i mpact they have .  Our aim is to minimise the need for cars and other vehicles 
driving in and through the borough by creating better alternatives and ensuring parking policy and traffic management creates  a better balance between transport 
choices.  Where c ar and vehicles need to be used they should have the lowest impact possible, with zero emission vehicles powered by renewable  electricity the 
aim. More infrastructure is needed to support this and we are looking to the private sector, TfL and central gover nment  to deliver this, while through or Low 
Emission Vehicle Charging Strategy we have identifi ed a range of supporting initiatives intended to encourage uptake of electric vehicles . 
 35 
  
 
 
Decarbonised  Transport : what we have done  
 
Objective  Actions  
3.1 
An integrated and 
sustainable approach 
to transport that meets 
local needs without 
compromising the 
environment  Agreement of a Local Implementation Plan supporting delivery of the London Mayor’s Transport Strategy (MTS) with  an overarching 
aim of reducing de pendency on cars and sets a strategic target for 80% of journeys in London to be made by walking, cycling and 
public transport by 2041 . 
3.2 
Healthy 
neighbourhoods that 
promote walking and 
cycling  Lewisham were the first borough to implement a Quietway rou te for cyclists in 2017, with further routes completed or in motion as 
set out in the Council’s Cycling Strategy. This includes Cycleway 4, which will provide a fully segregated facility for cycli sts along Evelyn 
Street, linking Greenwich to Tower Bridge a nd beyond.  
Pedestrian improvements for local c entres including  wide r, decluttered  and attractive footways designed to encourage people into 
these areas. These improvements have been complemented by other smaller, but just as impactful schemes, such as n ew pedestrian 
crossings, bus stop accessibility , on-street cycle hangars, visitor cycle parking, and a popular bike loan scheme.  
The borough has introduced a 20mph limit and is currently strengthening this by implementing speed compliance measures on tho se 
roads with the greatest exceedances. The Council’s support of the Vision 2020 target to eliminat e all fatal and serious collisions on 
the borough ’s roads will be key to encouraging confidence in making more journeys on foot and by bicycle.  This is suppo rted by other 
safety improvements and a comprehensive road safety education programme, which includes cycle training for anyone 
living/working/studying in the borough.  
3.3 
Improvements to public 
transport  Bus routes between Lewisham and Catford, and New C ross and Camberwell have been declared as Low Emission Bus Zones, which 
means that all buses using these corridor must meet the highest standard s for emissions .   
Implementation of traffic management with the Council’s bus priority programme designed to ensure the smooth runn ing of bus 
routes by tackling obstructive parking or enhancing bus lane provision. The Council also has a well -established CPZ programme which 
seeks primarily to discourage commuter trips, but can also help to prevent broader instance s of inconsiderate parking.  
3.4 
Supporting the uptake 
of cleaner vehicles and 
reducing emissions 
from vehicles   The Council has developed a Low Emission Vehicle Charging Strategy which sets out how the Council intends to expand recharging  
infrastructure i n the period up to the launch of the extension to the Ultra Low Emission Zone in 2021. The delivery programme is 
already underway, with 49 standard (7kWh)  charging points now in place across the borough  and 8 rapid (50kWh) chargers . 
The Council has deliv ered ‘ Cleaner Air Villages ’ through introducing coordination of servicing and d elivery as well as logistics planning 
for c onstruction vehicles.  
 36 
  
  
Decarbonised Transport : future actions  
 
Objective  Action  Timeframe/cost/owner  
3.1 
An integrated 
and sust ainable 
approach to 
transport that 
meets local 
needs without 
compromising 
the environment  3.1.1   
Work with TfL to review the scope to realign existing regional transport targets to 2041 with the 2030 
ambition to respond to the Climate Emergency . Evaluate the implications of any realignment in terms of 
funding, existing and planned programmes and the development of the next version of Lewisham’s Local 
Implementation Plan.  
 
 Short term  
??££  
SGM Highways and Transport  
3.2  
Healthy 
neighbourhoods 
that promot e 
walking and 
cycling  3.2.1  
Complete the Deptford Parks Liveable Neighbourhoods programme supporting healthier streets, improved 
air quality and support for walking and cycling. The works include  a new pedestrian and cycle route along 
Surrey Canal Road , improvements to existing walking/cycling routes, road closure s and play area outside a 
school and improved crossing points. The scheme is due to complete in 2021 . Short term  
££££  
SGM Highways and Transport  
3.2.2  
Implement a Healthy Neighbourhoods  programm e to reduce traffic congestion, improve  air quality and 
encourage sustainable modes of travel. Proposals are informed by discussions with residents and key 
stakeholders living within the neighbourhood area. Areas prioritised by the current programme includ e 
Lewisham and Lee Green, East Sydenham, Telegraph Hill, and Bellingham. The intention is to implement a 
rolling programme across ever y area of the borough by 2030.  Short  term  
££££ 
SGM Highways and Transport  
3.2.3  
Engage more schools in the STARS accre ditation process by developing a School Travel Plan, with a target of 
50% of primary schools participating by 2021. A range of initiatives led by the school will be developed to 
encourage walking and cycling to school. Implement a programme of School Stree ts and Play Streets outside 
schools, whereby the road is closed to traffic at school pick up and drop off. Offer schools support to arrange 
Play Street events throughout the year.  2020/21  
£££ 
SGM Highways and Transport   
3.2.4  
Deliver a programme of local  transport improvements to provide a better walking environment along 
Lewisham High Street.  Short term  
£££ 
SGM Highways and Transport  
3.2.5   Shor t term  37 
 Implement a  programme of local transport improvements to support and e ncourage cycling in the borough, 
including  more  Cycleways, cycle hangars, cycle parking , dockless bike hire scheme  and the introduction of 
contr aflow lanes to one -way routes. Consult locally on reallocating road/parking space to achieve these 
outcomes where there are opportunities to do so.    £££ 
SGM Highways and Transport  
3.2.6   
Develop proposals for Healthy Street corridors to secure additional funding to implement:  
• The Lewisham Spine/A21 Healthy Streets corridor working collaboratively with TfL to support better 
connections between  the south and north of the borough. The proposals also include a major public 
realm improvement scheme at Deptford’s Church Street.  
• Work in partnership with TfL to t ransform the A2/New Cross Road, including improvements to the 
pedestrian and cycling envir onment, without detriment to bus journey times, and rebalance the 
dominance of vehicles.   
• Improvements to public realm in the Ringway Corridor to provide better active travel and public 
transport links through reallocation of road space between Southend L ane and Whitefoot Lane.  Long  term  
££££  
SGM Highways and Transport  
3.2.7   
Reflect the Council’s transport and public realm aspirations in the emerging masterplan for Catford, including 
the realignment of the South Circular (A205), and better pedestrian an d cycling routes and facilities.  Short  term  
££££ 
Director of Regeneration 
&Place  
3.2.8  
Deliver  a programme of measures to reduce road danger  including traffic calming measures to support 
compliance with the 20 mph  speed limit across the borough  and othe r measures to reduce the dominance, 
speed and number of the most dangerous vehicles on the borough’s roads.  Short term  
£££ 
SGM Highways and Transport  
3.2.9  
Extend the  programme to promote healthier lifestyles and active travel options in the borough , including 
cycle training for adults and children, cycle loan scheme, travel planning for schools, activities with 
communities to encourage walking and cycling and address real or perceived barriers to the take -up of active 
travel in the borough.  Short term  
£££ 
SGM Highways and Transport  
3.2.10  
Explore opportunities and seek funding to improve cycling provision on other distributor routes (approx. 
£500k -1m per corridor depending on length and types of measures required)  Medium term  
££££  
SGM Highways and Tran sport  
3.3 
Improvements to 
public transport  3.3.1   
Progress aspirations in the Council’s Vision for Rail including :  
• Providing sufficient capacity between the borough and east London employment areas;  
• Increase rail access to and from Lewisham’s growth area s; 
• Improve rail connectivity and services, especially east -west links in the south of the borough;  
• Enhance the quality of stations and provide step -free access at all stations in the borough;  Long term  
££££  
SGM Highways and Transport  38 
 • Improve the connectivity between stations and their local area.  
3.3.2  
Work with partners locally, regionally and nationally to secure the investment needed to implement the 
Bakerloo Line Extension into Lewisham.  Achieving this will be of huge strategic importance to achievi ng 
decarbonised transport in the borough.  Long term  
££££  
SGM Highways and Transport  
3.3.3  
Work with partners to secure the other infrastructure investment fundamental to achieving the outcomes of 
the Mayor’s Transport Strategy and the Council’s ambitio n to be carbon neutral by 2030 as set out in the 
‘Council’s Rail Vision’ including Lewisham Station & Strategic Interchange, Brockley Interchange, New 
Bermondsey Station, and the creation of step free and accessible public transport across the network.  Long term  
££££  
SGM Highways and Transport  
3.3.4  
Work with TfL to secure improvements to the reach and frequency of the bus network alongside 
improvements to bus journey times.  Long term  
££££  
SGM Highways and Transport  
3.4 
Supporting the 
uptake of cleane r 
vehicles and 
reducing 
emissions from 
vehicles  3.4.1  
Work with partners to achieve an ambition of at least one electric vehicle charging point within a 500m walk 
of every resident , to support the extension of the ULEZ by 2021 . Short term  
??££   
SGM Highw ays and Transport  
3.4.2  
Work with TfL to bring more low e mission buses into Lewisham, enabling the target for all new single deck 
buses to be  zero emission  2020/21  
??££   
SGM Highways and Transport  
3.4.3  
Implement the Council’s 2020 Parking Policy U pdat e, including an emissions -based charging scheme for 
resident s, business and staff permit holders, an d an  increase in the Pay and Display tariff.   Short term  
£££  
SGM Highways and Transport  
3.4.4  
Review the Council’s Controlled Parking Zone (CPZ) policy t o support alignment of strategic decisions on 
parking with delivery of the Healthier Neighbourhoods Programme.   Short term  
£  
SGM Highways and Transport  
3.4.5  
Develop more radical approaches to workplace parking levies supported by travel planning, with  LBL leading 
by example as well as retail/leisure centre parking levy.   Review potential for all money raised to be 
reinvested into transport improvements.  Short  term  
£££  
SGM Highways and Transport  
3.4.6  
Support a modal shift away from individual car o wnership  through the c reation of a new floating car club 
permit for operators which seeks to expand provision and availability of car club vehicles across the borough.  Short term  
£  
SGM Highways and Transport  
3.4.7  
Commence implementation of powers to en force against idling vehicles. This will be supported by ongoing 
campaign work on this issue, including working closely with schools, which will be a priority area for 
enforcement.  2020/21  
£  
SGM Highways and Transport  
 39 
 Decarbonised Transport :  our asks of others  
 
An early decision should be made and work accelerated to bring the Bakerloo Line Extension to Lewisham . HMT/D epartment for Transport /Transport for London  
 
Further ULEX expansion to cover the entire borough, or/and the tightening of emission sta ndards for the Low Emission Zone (LEZ) to the same level as ULEX to 
significantly reduce traffic emissions from the most polluting heavy diesel vehicles driving through the borough.  Transport for London  
 
Bring forward TfL ambitions for zero emission zones  currently central/inner London ZEZ by 2040  with London wide ZEZ by 2050.  Transport for  London  
 
Cleaner fleet: Bringing forward TfL ambitions – currently all buses to be zero emission (ie no hybrid) by 2040.  Transport for London  
 
Government should adopt and  extend the existing TfL scrappage scheme  for older polluting vehicles . HMT / Department for Transport  
 
Broader road pricing – either London wide or national . Department for Transport /Transport for London  
 
Enforcement of speed limits  including considerati on of decriminalisation of speed limits which would give boroughs the power to undertake enforcement . 
Department for Transport /Transport for London  
 
Investment in public transport – metroisation, Brockley interchange, station improvements, bus frequency/s ervice enhancements, demand responsive bus trials . 
Department for Transport /Transport for London  
 
Government needs to rethink its approach to aviation and in particular potential expansion of Heathrow and London City Airpor ts to be consistent with the UK’ s 
climate change commitments and avoid wasteful investment in infrastructure that will not be viable in the twenty -first century.  HMT / DfT   
 
Investment in power grid and renewable energy  to support electric vehicle charging, and facilitating collaboration  between providers to enhance user experience . 
Department for Tr ansport /Transport for London  
 
 
  40 
  
Greener Adaptive Lewisham : our ambition and the challenge we face  
 
The climate crisis is part of a wider ecological crisis , with biodiversity and habitats u nder huge pressure , and a ction on climate change should be integrated with 
policies and programmes across all environmental issues. This true internationally  and nationally , but is particularly meaningful at a local level.  As a local authority 
the Council  delivers a range of environmental -related services including on  energy, flooding, waste & recycling, biodiversity, air quality, sustainable transport, 
planning, parks and open spaces. Our ambition is to s trengthen the connections across this work to prote ct and enhance the local environment  and work in ways 
that make the most sense to local community groups and individuals who will often naturally respond to these issues in a more  holistic way.  
 
Although climate change and air quality are usually framed a s environmental issues, they are both fundamentally concerned with social justice.  T he very young, 
older people and those already suffer ing from ill -health are most at risk from the harmful consequences of poor air quality.  We also know that there is a s trong 
relationship betwe en higher levels of social depri vation and poor air quality, and that areas that are more ethnically diverse also experience wo rse air quality.  Our 
vulnerable residents are also least resilient to the extreme weather events that ar e a consequence of a changing climate, and disproportionately disadvantaged by 
rising energy, insurance and other living costs that result from the effects of the carbon intensity of the global and nation al economy.   
 
We must  recognise that action to redu ce carbon emissions is not enough.  The climate is already changing as a result of human activity and the extent of this and 
what it means in terms of extreme temperatures, storms and flooding is hard  to predict.  Green spaces, trees, hedgerows and natural ised watercourses offer 
opportunities to mitigate against the impacts of climate change .  Trees, particularly those on streets or other built up locations, deliver a range of benefits including:  
storing carbon ; improving local air quality ; drainage and res ilience to storm events ; shading and reducing the urban heat island effect ; biodiversity; and m aking   
places look and feel nicer to be in.  
 
In short, the v alue of trees is immeasurable.  Evidence24 shows achieving these benefits is dependent on having the r ight tree in the right location.  Achieving this  is 
not easy.  The cost of planting trees is usually the easiest part, and prope r consideration of the location , engagement with residents and stakeholders, maintenance 
costs , insurance and remedial works res ulting from root d amage are all important factors . Lewisham is already a place with a healthy population of trees , our latest 
count estimated 30,000 mature trees in the borough , and we want to extend this working with local communities to maximise the bene fits of trees for Lewisham.   
 
Our individual and collective use of resources is at the heart of most environmental considerations, and this is often most e viden t in terms of what we do with good s 
and materials once we have finished with them.  Household w aste in the borough is already managed in a low carbon way by avoiding landfill and converting waste 
to energy at the South East London Combined Heat & Power Energy Recover y Facility (SELCHP) . An aspiration for a carbon neutral waste strategy is a  chance to put 
into practice the links throughout the whole life cycles of the materials we use create opportunities to consume less and extract more from what we use through 
energy generation or reuse of valuable materials.   
 
                                                           
24 https://research.birmingham.ac.uk/portal/en/publications/using -green-infrastructure -to-improve -urban -air-quality -gi4aq(adc6162d -9a0a -4b23 -a1d5 -
f445f9cc1d37).html?_ga=2.21453368.267070095.1580926707 -500817242.1580926707   41 
  
Greener Adaptive Lewisham : what we have done  
 
Objective  Actions  
4.1 
Increase 
climate 
change 
resilience 
through 
improvements 
to local green 
infrastructure 
and other 
adaptive 
measures.  Ecological restoration work in Chinbrook meadows, Beckenham Place Park, Brookmill Park, Ladywell Fields and  along the River Pool Linear Park 
and Riverview Walk.  
The 2016 ‘Sites of Importance for Nature Conservation’ habitat assessment identified a 35% improvement in access to nature in  Lewisham over 
the last 10 years.  
Strategic Flood Risk Management Strateg y published in 2015  
Recent improvement works in Beckenham Place Park saw 12,000 young trees and tree whips planted by an army of volunteers showi ng the 
enthusiasm for planting that exists in the borough.    
Lewisham Council has an existing programme in  the borough with Street Trees for Living with 300 new trees due to be planted in 2020/21.  Our 
database of the borough of previously identified tree locations has up to 2,500 potential locations identified where more tre es could be planted.  
The new draf t Lewisham  Local Plan includes a strategic objective to promote and protect the ecological, biodiversity and amenity value of the 
Borough’s natural assets - including trees, green spaces and water spaces - and seek to enhance existing assets or make new pr ovision through 
new development wherever opportunities arise.  
8 new water fountains have been installed in our parks and green spaces with plans for 9 more in 2020/21.  
4.2 
Improving air 
quality  The Construction Forum  in Evelyn is working to manage emis sions from construction traffic and site activity in this highly congested area.  
Lewisham Air App  launched in March 2018 offering a free low pollution route planner, health warning s where pollution levels are predicted to be 
high. This is being developed  further to incorporate and promote tranquil areas.  
Air Quality Monitoring Supersite in Lewisham, Honor Oak Park Sports Ground, which is  one of only several ‘Supersite S tations ’ in the country 
carrying out research on air  quality and interactions. The S upersite also includes new instruments that detect a variety of greenhouse gases and 
ozone -depleting chemicals, and can help the UK comply with legally -binding targets set  out in the Climate Change Act.  
Raising awareness around schools, including anti -idling events, a public health -led school Superzone project , and public engagement with local 
‘Air Quality Ch ampions’ . 
Delivery of a range of transport -related benefits (see section on Decarbonised Transport) including Liveable Neighbourhoods, ‘Low Emission s 
Vehicle Charging strategy 2018 -2022’ , a new parking policy review  and powers for enforcement of id ling vehicles.  
Moved to p revent ice cream vans from idling under the terms o f licence agreement in parks.   
4.3 
A carbon 
neutral waste 
strategy  Lewisham’s  municipal waste is disposed of at the South East London Combined Heat & Power  Energy Recovery Facility (SELCHP) in New Cross .  
We collect 85,000 tonnes of waste a year, which is incinerated instead of going to landfill, a volume of waste annually the size  of SELCHP itself .  
A new Reduction and Recycling Plan was agreed at Mayor and Cabinet in December 2019.  
Our planning policie s mean we expect m ajor development proposals to be net zero -waste and they will be required to submit a Circular 
Economy State ment, as part of the Sustainable Design Statement . 
Rolled out of initial successful pilot to minimise contamination of waste on an individual estate.  
 
  42 
  
 
Greener Adaptive Lewisham : future actions  
 
Objective  Action  Timeframe/cost/owner  
4.1 
Increase 
climate 
change 
resilience 
through 
improvements 
to local green 
infrastructure 
and other 
adaptive 
measures.  
 4.1.1   
Use an evidenced -based approach to increasing tree stocks, tree canopy and linear metres of 
hedgerow.  Explore ‘self -funding’ models proposed b y local community organisations. We will 
work with local community organisations to develop the concept of a new Lewisham Climate 
Emergency Tree initiative. We will carry out a scoping exercise in partnership with the Healthy 
Neighbourhoods programme to id entify new potential locations for trees and to identify the right 
kind of tree for the right location seeking to increase street tree canopy cover in areas with a 
deficiency of street trees.  We will advise developers on the right kind of trees for new 
developments to maximise the ecological and adaptive benefits.  2020/21  
??££  
SGM Green Scene  
4.1.2  
Review Lewisham’s Flood Risk Management Strategy to promote sustainable drainage solutions 
including new flood storage areas in green spaces, flood risk miti gation interventions at areas at 
high risk and development of tree pits and other storage solutions for surface water flooding.  2020/21  
£ (future actions cost unknown)  
Director of Regeneration & Place  
4.1.3  
Develop highways -based Sustainable Urban Drain age solutions to reduce the risk of surface water 
flooding reduce pressures on highways drainage.  Short term  
£££ 
SGM Highways and Transport  
4.1.4  
Refuse requests for installation of crossovers on the footway to accommodate parking on new 
front driveways  unless there is evidence that planning consent is obtained and the driveway is 
permeable and/or drainage discharges to a soft landscaped area.  2020/21  
£ 
SGM Highways and Transport  
4.1.5  
Where appropriate and safe to do so, reduce the amount of waste tra nsported to recycling centres 
by managing waste in the park it was generated in e.g. use dea d leaves as mulch on shrub beds .  2020/21  
£ 
SGM Green Scene  
4.1.6  
Work with local user groups to support the implementation of projects designed to benefit locall y 
appropriate biodiversity and engagement.  2020/21  
£ 
SGM Green Scene  
4.1.7  
Develop an integrated approach to green infrastructure across the public realm across our work 
on parks, highways, regeneration, housing and through our planning function.  Short term  
??££  
SGM Green Scene  43 
 4.1.8  
Review and develop the Council’s response to prolonged period of high temperatures to inform 
and support the Council’s emergency response process.  This will include ‘cool’ refuges in public 
buildings, identifying at risk groups and implications for relevant service teams.  2020/21  
£ 
Emergency Planning Business Continuity 
Manager  
4.1.9  
Adopt a new Local Plan that will seek to ensure that a ll development proposals identify and retain 
existing habitats and features of biodi versity value. Use the new Local Plan to drive positive gains 
for biodiversity, particularly in areas that are deficient in public access to nature conservation.  2020/21  
£ 
Director of Planning  
4.2 
Improving air 
quality25  
 4.2.1   
Introduc e the  Clean Air N eighbourhoods where communities can cooperate in measures that will 
reduce carbon with the aim of being an approved ‘Clean Air Neighbourhood’, allowing them to 
influence future development and businesses into their area.  Short term  
££ 
Director of Public He alth /SGM Highways 
and Transport  
4.2.2  
Develop joint public engagement on air quality and climate change to raise awareness and create 
additional impetus for action.  
 2020/21  
£ 
Director of Public Health / Director of 
Strategy and Communications  
4.2.3  
Consider future alternative permitting arrangements for ice cream vans for example only 
permitting electric ice cream vans from trading on Lewisham land  but also investigate more radical 
solutions such as avoiding vehicles altogether creating opportunities  for local mobile vendors using 
carts instead of a vehicle.    2020/21  
£ 
SGM Green Scene  
  
4.3 
A carbon 
neutral waste 
strategy  4.3.1  
Investigate the possibility of opening a re -use shop within the borough. A full project plan will be 
created with an aim to  divert waste from incineration or recycling and encourage the reuse of 
items as directed by the waste hierarchy.  Short term  
££ 
Director of Environment  
4.3.2  
Identify and develop proposals to make Lewisham’s Reduction and Recycling Strategy a fully 
carbo n neutral strategy on waste.  
 Short term  
??££  
Director of Environment  
 
 
 
  
                                                           
25 There are a wide range of actions the Council is taking on air quality set out on the Council’s we bsite https://lewisham.gov.uk/myservices/environment/air -pollution/what -we-are-doing -
to-improve -air-quality -in-lewisham   44 
  
Greener Adaptive Lewisham :  our asks of others  
 
Post -Brexit the UK is now at risk of lower environmental standards. The G overnment must use the planned Environmental Bill  to guar antee a minimum commitment 
to EU standards particularly on air quality, biodiversity, water conservation and waste and the circular economy. Department for Food, Environment and Rural 
Affairs (DEFRA)   
 
The focus of the Environment Bill should reflect the h olistic nature of the environment and not just existing Government Departmental responsibilities.  Climate 
change and carbon needs to be reflected alongside air quality, waste, water and biodiversity. DEFRA  
 
There is clear evidence demonstrating the impact  poor air quality has , particularly for children , with the smallest particulates a significant concern.  The Government 
should urgently adopt W orld Heath Organisation  limit s for PM2.5  and resource local authorities to take further steps on air quality to protect vulnerable residents . 
DEFRA    
 
The cumulative impact of paving individual driveways is reducing existing drainage capacity creates risks of localised surface water flooding. Government should 
reverse th e careless approach that has allowed this to ha ppen and should provide support for local engagement and enforcement to ensure the use of permeable 
materials and incentivise reversing poor quality driveways back into front gardens . Ministry of Housing, C ommunities and Local Government (MHCLG) / Defra  
 
The UK needs a new radical approach to the waste industry based on principles that properly account for the full value of resou rces including the cost of disposal. 
This should include:  
 New targets for the waste industry that focus o n waste prevention ; 
 Introd uction of the Extended Producer Responsibility so that the producer pays for waste materials and packaging including batterie s, textiles, food;  
 Introduce deposit return schemes and a tax on plastic;  
 Products, food and other goods should be labelled with q uantified information on carbon intensity of manufacture and transport;  
 Incentives for weekly food was te collections at a local level.  
HMT/Defra  
 
Support should be offered to local authorities with tree programmes through funding a national insurance sche me to indemnify local authorities a gainst increase 
risk of claims . MHCLG  / Defra  
 
Highways Authorities should be given new resources and duties in relation to sustainable urban drainage. HMT/DfT/ Defra  
 
Statutory undertakers digging up roads should be requ ired to compensate local authorities for the wasteful destruction of trees that results from work s performed 
without due care . Defra  
 
Additional support should be created in the national planning policy framework to promote net positivity for biodiversity and green infra structure. MHCLG  45 
  
Inspiring, Learning and L obbying : our ambition and the challenge we face  
 
The Council’s evidence base26 for our response to the Climate Emergency  identified a total cost of at least £1.6bn to achieve the ambition for the b orough to be 
carbon neutral by 2030.  The investment needed to deliver on this agenda can only be secured through the combined resources of stakeholders locally, regionally 
and nationally  and t he Council has an integral role in making that happen by suppor ting residents, communities and partners locally to make change.   
 
Delivering on the ambition to be carbon neutral will mean far -reaching changes for the borough.  It will be essential that residents are informed and engaged in this 
process  of change , and  that we find ways to motivate people to take action and support the work that will be needed.  In particular , we need to make sure that 
those involved , and those benefiting from the wider benefits of action , reflect the diversity of communities we have in  Lewisham.     
 
The Council has identified the climate crisis as one of the core priorities for our corporate communications plan and we inte nd to use a variety of ways to inform, 
inspire and communicate with residents on the need for action, on the practic al things we can all do and the Council’s plans going forward on this agenda . 
Lewisham’s successful bid to be the Borough of Culture in London in 2021 is a fantastic opportunity to engage with people on th e climate through means that will 
reson ate in a ver y different and powerful way.  As our Borough of Culture manifesto says : we believe in the power of art and culture; c ulture changes lives, and so 
will we.  
 
The Climate Emergency campaign across the UK and beyond has been characterised by grassroots pressu re for action, inspired by school strikes, activists and a 
sense that window of opportunity to act is closing.  There are many people and groups in Lewisham who are hugely knowledgeable about the climate crisis and 
committed to taking action.  These people  represent an incredible resource to drive action. Our aim is to g alvanis e the power for change across different sectors of 
our community and beyond.   There are a number of organisations in Lewisham already making significant strides towards reducing carbo n emissions.  The Horniman 
Museum and Goldsmiths University have made Climate Emergency declarations and many of the borough’s schools are leading the way as voices for action.  
Working in partnership is essential to the way Councils need to operate and a fundamental part of the Lewisham Way, the Council’s own set of values.  
 
This is a 10 -year programme and this Action Plan will need to respond to changing technology, policy and emerging practice from elsewhere in the borough and 
beyond.  In responding to the Climate Emergency the Council want to actively understand and learn from stakeholders , and particularly our residents , to shape what 
we do and how we do it. Publishing this Action Plan is the start of something and we intend to be open to new ideas a s we develop the Plan going forward.  
 
Most fundamentally of all we need Government to take significant and sustained action to support our ambition s to respond to the climate crisis . Government 
needs to work with us and support us to make this happen throug h investment in infrastructure, by setting the right legislative framework and by putting in place 
the fiscal incentives needed to transform housing in the borough, decarbonise the way we travel  and within a decade , enable the cultural change that will tra nsform 
Lewisham for better.  
                                                           
26 http://councilmeetings.lewisham.gov.uk/documents/s71180/04%20Climate%20Emergency%20update%20210120.pdf   46 
  
Inspiring, Learning  and Lobbying : what we have done  
 
Objective  Actions  
5.1 
Inspir ing, inform ing and 
engaging residents and 
communities .  In autumn 2019 a new corporate Communications Strategy was agreed, with a commitment to  deliver strategic communic ations 
over a three -year -period  through a ‘campaign plan aligned to the corporate priorities’. Environmental Emergency – 
encompassing Climate Emergency  and Air Quality – is one of three priorities with a national as well as local  focus within that 
strategy.  
Climate Emergency was identified as one of the core themes of Lewisham’s successful Borough of Culture for London in 2021.   
5.2 
Supporting a grassroots 
movement towards low 
carbon living  
   
 The Council supported South Ea st London Community Energy’s community share offer funding solar panels on schools with lease 
agreements at two Lewisham schools benefiting from the panels funded through the share offer.  
In September the Council participated in the launch of solar toget her a community -based bulk purchasing initiative to help 
Londoners access  lower costs for solar panels.  
In September 2019 the Council launched a new Community Energy Fund offering up to £15,000 once -off grants to local 
community initiatives to support e nergy efficiency and carbon reduction projects such as solar panels on community buil dings.  
5.3 
Working in partnership to 
respond to the climate crisis  The Council is working through London Councils and representative London fora such as the Association o f Local Energy Officers.  
Initial meetings held on Climate Emergency  with the Horniman, Lewisham Hospital, Lewisham College, Lewisham Homes, 
Phoenix Community Housing, Goldsmiths  
Ongoing meetings held with Climate Action Lewisham to create opportunitie s to align local campaigning with the Council’s 
approach.  
5.4 
Being open to new ideas and 
continuing to raise our game 
on Climate Emergency  Public Forum held on 29 January to discuss the outcome of the Council’s trajectory research and seek ideas for the  Action Plan 
and the Council’s approach going forward.  
5.5 
Engaging Government and 
others to bring about radical 
change  The Council is working through London Councils and representative London fora such as the Association of Local Energy Officer s 
at membe r and officer levels.  
Published the Mayor’s response to Client Earth outlining the work the Council is doing and encouraging scrutiny and pressure on 
central government to deliver action.  
 
 
  47 
  
 
Inspiring, Learning  and Lobbying : future actions  
 
Objecti ve Action  Timeframe/cost/owner  
5.1 
Inspiring, 
informing and 
engaging 
residents and 
communities.  
 
 
 5.1.1   
Implement a n integrated  communications  plan , reviewed and updated on a rolling basis. 
The Lewisham Climate Emergency  Working Group and staff forum will support this work by  
identifying gaps and opportunities for developing further initiatives.  2020/21  
££ 
Director of Strategy and Communications  
5.1.2  
Identify and implement opportunities to engage, inspire and learn from groups reflecting  
the divers ity of our borough in terms of age, ethnicity and socio -economic background.   2020/21  
££ 
Director of Strategy and Communications  
5.1.3  
Publish a practical guide to action on carbon reduction for residents.  2020/21  
££ 
Director of Culture &Community Develo pment  
5.1.4  
Develop the proposals within Lewisham’s Borough of Culture programme to create new 
innovative ways to engage with residents on climate change through culture and collective 
action.  Our plan is that 2021 becomes a year of concerted action on carbon reduction 
across Lewisham.  Short term  
£££ 
ED Housing, Environment and Regeneration  
5.1.5  
Work with Lewisham’s Young Mayor to support and grow existing action by young people in 
the borough on climate change.  Work to ensure the views of young pe ople are integrated 
within the Council’s approach to action on climate change.  2020/21  
£ 
Director of Strategy and Communications  
5.1.6  
Undertake a survey to inform the Council’s understanding of residents’ attitudes to climate 
change, priorities for act ion and further develop the Council’s lobbying of Government and 
others.   2020/21  
£ 
Director of Strategy and Communications  
5.2 
Supporting a 
grassroots 5.2.1   
Complete grant agreements under the Lewisham Community Ene rgy Fund and publicise 
delivery showcasing good practice and finding opportunities to share learning.  2020/21  
£££ 
ED Housing, Environment and Regeneration  48 
 move ment 
towards low 
carbon living  5.2.2  
Work with community partners to develop further funding opportunities to support local 
commu nity energy projects.  Short term  
??££  
ED Housing, Environment and Regeneration  
5.3 
Working in 
partnership to 
respond to the 
climate crisis  
  5.3.1  
Establish a Lewisham Climate Commitment  supported by local partner organisations to 
agree a common purpose,  promote joint working and improve transparency on carbon 
emissions across key organisations in the borough.  2020/21  
£ 
ED Housing, Environment and Regeneration  
5.3.2  
Work with London Councils, the GLA and other London boroughs to develop and present a 
coherent case for change at national level to deliver the investment, legislation, fiscal 
incentives and leadership needed to respond to the climate crisis.  2020/21  
£ 
ED Housing, Environment and Regeneration  
5.3.3  
Work with local education and skills provi ders and with local businesses to develop the 
supply chain for building retrofit and carbon reduction technologies.  Support local people 
to gaining the accredited skills needed to gain employment and ensure Lewisham’s 
economy benefits from growth in the c arbon reduction sector.  Integrate energy, carbon 
and climate activity into Lewisham’s Inclusion and Growth Strategy.  Short term  
££ 
Head of Economy and Partnership  
5.3.4  
Work in partnership with neighbouring boroughs on flooding, and green linkages to address 
sub regional environmental issues.  Short term  
£ 
ED Housing, Environment and Regeneration  
5.3.5  
Create a public sector network in the borough to share good practice and support on 
carbon reduction.  2020/21  
£  
ED Housing, Environment and Regenerati on 
5.3.6  
Publish a practical guide to action on carbon reduction for local businesses . 2020/21  
£ 
ED Housing, Environment and Regeneration  
5.4  
Being open to 
new ideas and 
continuing to 
raise our game 
on Climate 
Emergency  5.4.1 
Create a lessons -learned l og from day one of delivering the Action Plan to capture new 
ideas, contacts, improvements and changes that are needed to try and keep Lewisham 
engaged and active at the forefront of action on the Climate Emergency.  2020/21  
£ 
Climate Resilience Manager  
5.4.2 
Commit to an annual public review of our Climate Emergency work to be held on or near 
the anniversary of the original declaration of a Climate Emergency (27 February 2019)  2020/21  
£ 
ED Housing, Environment and Regeneration  49 
 5.5 
Engaging 
Government 
and others to 
bring about 
radical change  5.5.1  
Lewisham’s Mayor to write to London Councils and the GLA to set out the Council’s full set 
of lobbying points and seek wider support.  2020/21  
£ 
ED Housing, Environment and Regeneration  
5.5.2  
Officers to suppor t a pan -London approach to lobbying through London Councils, the 
Association of Local Energy Officers in London and through other fora.  2020/21  
£ 
ED Housing, Environment and Regeneration  
5.5.3  
Seek to agree a joint statement with local MPs, Climate Acti on Lewisham, Extinction 
Rebellion and other local lobbying environmental groups to the UK Prime Minister setting 
out our call for action and seeking to influence 26th UN Climate Change Conference of the 
Parties (COP26) . 2020/21  
£ 
ED Housing, Environment an d Regeneration  
 
  50 
  
Inspiring, Learning  and Lobbying :  our asks of others  
 
The UK Government needs to accelerate its policies and programmes to respond to the climate crisis.  In particular Government  should review the commitment to 
be net zero carbon by 2050 and ensure that all possible efforts are made to bring forward action given the need for an urgent response.  Government  should move 
fully behind local authorities and others working to accelerated timeframes and provide additional resource to support  this effort as early transformatory action is 
the only way that national change can be delivered.  Business Energy and Industrial Strategy (BEIS)  
 
National government needs to properly understand and communicate what it refers to as the ‘distributional im plications’ of action to delivery of the UK target to 
be net zero carbon by 2050. National Government should take a lead in ensuring that the equalities implications of action to cut carbon emissions do not impact 
adversely on vulnerable communities and in dividuals. BEIS  
 
Government should lower the age of voting to include 16 and 17 year olds.  Young people will be disproportionately affected b y a changing climate and have been 
at the forefront of action to raise awareness of the need for society to tackle  the climate crisis.  Extending the voting age gives younger people a stronger voice in 
relation to the choices that need to be made now that will impact on their future. Cabinet Office   
 
Local government needs a strong and active voice nationally and loca lly to ensure the impetus behind Climate Emergency declarations is maintained, that local 
authorities are not burdened with sole responsibility and that national government fully engages on this agenda. Local Government Association and London 
Councils  
 
Government should co -design a campaign of practical advice to residents, businesses and others to inspire action on carbon emissions.  The campaig n should be 
co-designed with and for local authorities to use in responding to the Climate Emergency. BEIS  
 
Natio nal Government should reflect the importance of museums, theatres and other cultural venues in terms of engagement and commun ication with the public.  
Funding should be made available to ensure that they can invest in their buildings so that they remain cr edible in terms of communicating on carbon reduction. 
HMT/DCMS  
 
Further action is needed on carbon emissions that cannot be measured locally such as increasing fiscal disincentives for freq uent flyers. Government should 
change recent practice when it comes  to economic decisions to support failing businesses in the aviation industry and shift resource to more businesses that are 
more sustainable in every sense. HMT / Department for Transport / BEIS  
 
 
 51 
 SECTION THREE : DELIVERY  
3.1  Our aim is t o take a transp arent approach to delivery that is embedded across the Council , so that action on carbon reduction becomes part of the culture of the  
organisation .  It is important that our partners, stakeholders and residents know that taking action on the climate crisis  is prioritised by the Council .  One of the 
most fundamental ways we can demonstrate this is through showing that the way we deliver services reflects what we say  on climate change . We also inten d to 
listen to our residents and others , and to learn from go od practice and new ideas so that we can develop our stra tegic and operational approach over the 10 
years to 2030 . 
Governance  
3.2 Changes to costs, resources, technology as well as socio -economic factors may require changes to the Action Plan  which will b e regularly reviewed and updated.  
Progress on the Action Plan  will be reviewed annually by our Executive Management Team and through the Council’s scrutiny committee process  including 
reporting annually to the Mayor and Cabinet on progress . We will publish  a public update once a year setting out what has been done in that year and updating 
our set of actions going forward.    
3.3 In line with the actions set out under the theme of ‘Inspiring, learning and lobbying’ we plan a range of public -facing events.  W e also intend to provide an annual 
forum for discussion on the local response to the Climate Emergency  with a view to holding this on or near the anniversary of the original declaration each year .   
Resources  
3.4 A declaration of a Climate Emergency  by a local authority offers access to no new sources of funding or any new powers.  In six years Lewisham Council’s 
Government funding has been cut by over 58%, while at the same time the Council has faced increased costs.  It is clear that we will need to be i nnovative in our 
approach, to seek partnerships and take opportunities for external funding , as well as bending existing resources to contribut e to delivery.  In line with our 
commitment for action on the Climate Emergency  to be action on social justice we  will prioritise the use of Council resources to support the most vulnerable in 
our society from the consequences of climate change.  
3.5 There will be residual carbon emissions in Lewisham by the target date.  The ambition in Lewisham’s Climate Emergency declaration implies that some form of 
carbon offsetting will then be used from 2030/31 onwards to achieve carbon neutral status .  The Council has made no commitment to this , and we will assess 
the options in line with our wider financial duty and our empha sis on local benefits and support for vulnerable residents .  Tree planting is one way to offset 
carbon emissions , but it cannot do so alone and does not offer a permanent solution. In the Lewisham trajectory study, the ‘Systemic change’ sc enario results in  
residual annual carbon emissions of 122,129 tonnes CO 2e.  The amount of carbon a tree absorbs varies depending on the maturity of the tree, the type of tree 
and other factors , and a range of estimates can be found from a variety of sources on this. At the  highest end it has been suggested that a mature tree could 
absorb 150kg carbon a year, although even at 20 years a well -established tree may only absorb 45kg a year27.  It would require more than 2.7m such trees to 
offset the residual 122,129 tonnes of car bon in our most ambitious scenario.     
                                                           
27 http://urbanforestrynetwork.org/benefits/air%20quality.htm   52 
 Equalities assessment  
3.6 Action on climate change should be action for social justice.  We will want to understand what the potential implications of a changing climate are for our 
residents and particularly in rela tion to vulnerability what this means from an equalities perspective and what actions we should take.  We will also want to 
understand and respond to the potential equalities implications local actions may have.  We will undertake an assessment of t he equa lities implications of this 
work and identify additional steps needed to mitigate these impacts in the groups affected.  
 
  53 
 Annex A : Climate Emergency  Action Plan Communications Strategy  
In autumn 2019 a new corporate Communications Strategy was agreed, se tting out a commitment to deliver ‘impactful strategic communications over a three -year -
period’ through a ‘campaign plan aligned to the corporate priorities’. The first step – in January 2020 - was to agree priority themes for proactive public relations (P R) 
work for 2020 -23. Environmental Emergency – encompassing Climate Emergency  and Air Quality – is one of three priorities with both a local and national focus . This 
reflects acknowledgement of the importance of action on Climate Emergency , of the resultan t need for communications and engagement with both local and national 
stakeholders, and of the potential for the Council to develop a national reputation as a leader in this policy area.  
In the past, support from the Communications Team for climate -related  initiatives came in short -term, ‘project -by-project’ form but this longer -term strategy will:  
• Bring together communications to support relevant service plans through a coherent, integrated approach with a unified narrat ive and brand (Towards Zero 
Carbon, with the mission of spearheading step -change in behaviours of individuals, groups, organisations and partnerships towards the goal of net -zero carbon 
by 2030);  
• Seek to raise awareness, help shape perceptions and attitudes, and influence decisions and behav iours in line with the Climate Emergency  Action Plan goals; 
and 
• Plan, implement, evaluate and report on activities geared to build the Council’s reputation and influence nationally as well as locally.  
 
The overarching aims of the communications strategy a re to:  
1. Demonstrate the Council’s leadership on climate change and commitment to reducing the borough’s carbon emissions;  
2. Encourage and enable action by residents and partner organisations; and  
3. Ensure staff understand how climate change is relevant to their  service area and to their own lives, and motivate them to take positive action in their role and 
outside of work.  
The overarching messaging is that:  
• Science demonstrates that urgent and radical action is needed at all levels of society to avert severe and  widespread environmental, social and economic 
disaster.  
• Action on climate change is taking action to support the most vulnerable in society.  
• There is nothing so big that we should not be prepared to look at it differently.  There is nothing so small that it does not contribute to making a difference.  
 
In line with the Communications Strategy, plans will be structured using the OASIS campaign framework (objective -audience -strategy -implementation -scoring).  
Objectives  54 
 The overarching aims listed above will p rovide the starting point for specific, measurable objectives for each priority audience group (including primary targets and  
secondary audiences, i.e. the stakeholders who influence them).  
Audiences  
Aim Primary audiences  Secondary audiences (influencers)  
Demonstrate the Council’s leadership on climate change 
and commitment to reducing the borough’s carbon 
emissions.  Residents  
Partner organisations*  
Local businesses  
Community groups  
Activist groups  
Resident Climate Emergency  email group  
National Government  
Local MPs  
GLA Local media  
National media  
Specialist media  
Social media influencers  
Community leaders**  
Climate change academics and policy think -tanks  
 
Encourage and enable action by residents and partner 
organisations.  Residents, including …  
Staff livin g in the borough  
Partner organisations*  
Local businesses  
Community groups  
National Government  
GLA Staff living in the borough  
Activist groups  
Resident Climate Emergency  email group  
Local MPs  
Local media  
National media  
Specialist media  
Social media influenc ers 
Community leaders**  
Ensure staff understand how climate change is relev ant 
to their service area and  their own lives . Motivate them 
to take positive action in their role and outside of work.  All staff  
 Executive Management Team  
Divisional Management T eams  
Staff Climate Emergency  email group  
 
 
*For example: Lewisham Homes, Goldsmiths, Lewisham Hospital, Horniman Museum, Lewisham College, SELCHP (Veolia), Phoenix Comm unity Housing, South East 
London Community Energy, Climate Action Lewisham, Laban and T he Albany.  
** For example: the Young Mayor and his deputy, and faith community leaders.  55 
 George Marshall - co-founder of Climate Outreach, a think -tank focussed on the theory and practice of climate change communications, and author of Don’t Even 
Think Abou t It - has pointed out that, “There’s a science to climate change and there’s a science to human psychology …. The most important co mmunications will be 
done on the basis of different audiences speaking in terms of their own values”.  
He argues that percept ions and behaviours around climate change have been polarised: whilst people on the political Left are often highly engaged a nd take proactive 
steps to lead lower -carbon lifestyles, most others are not. These others are most readily persuaded by people lik e themselves. Evidence gathered by Climate Outreach 
points to a highly -differentiated, peer -to-peer approach to communications.  
The Council’s own employees reflect much of the local community, with over half living in the borough. In addition, they are relatively easy to reach, so represent an 
excellent range of potential ‘agents of change’ (influencers). Externally, priority individual audiences would be those whose  incomes offer flexibility in lifestyle choices.  
Strategy  
An integrated PR plan is being dev eloped and will be reviewed and updated on a rolling basis. This will ensure all relevant opportunities for reaching target a udiences – 
both internal and external - are taken from initiatives across the Council. For example, active and visible participatio n of senior managers in low carbon activity; 
creation of a staff ‘Green Team’ of peer champions; and invitations for staff to suggest low carbon initiatives could help mo tivate staff to take positive action.  
The Lewisham Climate Emergency  Working Group wil l be responsible for identifying gaps and opportunities for developing further initiatives. As part of this, 
Communications will lead on identifying communications -specific gaps and opportunities to reach internal and external audiences.  
Communications str ategy development will be mindful of findings by McLoughlin et al. (2019) :  
• Making one behaviour change does not necessarily mean that a person will automatically make another;  
• Campaigns should build ‘self -efficacy’ and promote ‘co -benefits’ (e.g. heal th and wellbeing);  
• People’s values and sense of identity are crucial: peer -led conviction is stronger than coercion; and  
• Effective behaviour change strategies will move beyond ‘nudge’ to include ‘think’ approaches.  
Implementation  
Tactical decisions on messaging and channels will be informed by situation analysis of each target audience group and the desired impact of the rel evant initiative (e.g. 
raising awareness, triggering questions, shaping perceptions, influencing decisions, prompting action). A ro lling programme of activities will target the range of priority 
audiences to build, reinforce and extend key messaging over time. Human interest stories will be central to this messaging – and Communications will need the 
support of service colleagues to i dentify people with compelling stories to tell, and to gather communications materials ethically and legally.  
 
  56 
 Priorities for 2020 will be:  
• Gathering baseline data – including key audience perceptions and behaviours;  
• Raising awareness among Council s taff of the relevance of climate change to their work and lives – and motivating them to take positive action; and  
• Communications leading up to, during and after the Climate Emergency  Action Plan Launch on 17 March.  
External communication tactics for the  Climate Emergency  Action Plan launch include:  
• Dedicated website page;  
• Social media posts (Twitter, Linkedin and Facebook);  
• Briefing elected members in advance to keep them informed and to enable them to amplify social media posts; and  
• Tag relevant  external organisations in social media posts to broaden the reach.  
Scoring  
Quantitative and qualitative data from primary and secondary sources will be gathered and reviewed at key points to inform st rategy development. These will include 
baseline metrics  where possible for longitudinal comparison. The forthcoming Residents’ Survey offers an excellent opportunity to gather data on perceptions, 
attitudes and behaviours. Other data will include:  
• Quantitative measurement by services;  
• Qualitative data thro ugh small -sample research;  
• Media analytics;  
• Quality of media coverage; and  
• Invitations to participate in thought -leadership initiatives (e.g. speaking at conferences).  
Resources  
A named member of the Marketing Communications team will lead on day -to-day implementation and evaluation of the communications plan.  
Oversight  
The Communications Strategy will be approved by the Council’s Climate Emergency  Working Group and delivered by the Sustainability Manager and Communications 
Team. The Climate Emergen cy Working Group will review the action plan quarterly.  57 
 Annex B: Lewisham Council’s Carbon Offset Fund  
 
Lewisham Council’s Local Plan sets out the requirements for developments in relation to energy and carbon.  Developers will b e expected to meet the poli cy onsite, 
with offsetting the remainder through the Lewisham Carbon Offset Fund an option where every effort has been made to get as cl ose as possible to zero carbon.    
 
Lewisham Council expects carbon offsets to be paid into the Lewisham Carbon Offset F und based on the methodology established to calculate the cost of carbon28.   
The primary objective for the Lewisham Carbon Offset Fund is to deliver tangible carbon savings that will contribute to the C ouncil’s ambition for the borough to be 
carbon neutral  borough 2030.  
 
Proposed project will be assessed by the  Section 106 Overview Board based on a Section 106 Project Initiation Document (PID) template.  
 
The Board will review proposed projects against the criteria described in this document.  
 
Projects fu nded through the Lewisham Carbon Offset Fund need to demonstrate additionality in that they:  
 Would not have occu rred without the offset funding;  
 Would not have occurred under a business as usual scenario;  
 Are not required to meet national legislation.  
 
Carbon Saving  
Projects must deliver on the priorities set out in the Council’s Climate Emergency Action Plan and meet  one or more of these criteria:  
 Reduce energy demand in existing buildings, through energy efficienc y measures and providing advice;  
 Generate renew able electricity;  
 Generate renewable/ very low carbon and low emission heat e.g. solar thermal, heat pumps or fuel cells, replacing higher carbon systems that cont ribute to poor 
air quality such as gas -engine CHP;  
 Support low carbon heat networks;  
 Undertake whole building retrofit, e.g. improve energy and water efficiency, install renewables and smart metering.  
 
Co-benefits  
The primary focus for offset funds is to achieve carbon savings but, where possible, projects should maximise co -benefits i.e. wid er environmental, social and economic 
benefits that align with Lewisham Council’s Climate Emergency Action Plan focus on social justice. Examples of these co -benefits include:  
 Alleviating fuel poverty;  
 Improving air quality;  
                                                           
28 
https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=3&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=2ahUKEwj1kNqV9d_nAhX1QkEAHQazB5AQFjACegQIB BAB&url=h ttps%3A%2F%2Flewisham.
gov.uk%2F -%2Fmedia%2Ffiles%2Fimported%2Flewishamcarbonoffsetstudy.ashx&usg=AOvVaw0XDWHn85E9zyena9AM7Myx   58 
  Heal th benefits for local resid ents;  
 Addressing inequalities that result from a changing climate or through policies responding to climate change;  
 Inspiring wider action on carbon reduction;  
 Creating local jobs and increasing skills.  
 
To assess the wider benefits of a project, beyond ca rbon savings, projects may be scored based on quantified environmental and social benefits. Project scoring should 
reflect the number of local priorities the project addresses, and how widespread the benefits are expected to be to the wider  community. Co -benefits should be 
quantified as far as possible. Some examples of co -benefits that projects could be assessed against are:  
 Number of fuel poor households benefitting from energy efficiency improvemen ts, or air quality improvements;  
 Number of additional job s and training opportunities that t he project will deliver locally;  
 Expected health benefits where these can be referenced back to a relevant e vidence base.  
 
Project Plan  
Project plans should include:  
 Assigned pr oject manager/key contact point;  
 A full desc ription of the project, including the approach taken to calculate carbon reductions, the baseline to be used if appropriate, and total cost of the project.  
 Confirmation from the Council’s Climate Resilience Manager that the project supports delivery of Le wisham’s Climate Emergency Strategic Action Plan;  
 Method ology for measuring co -benefits;  
 Timescales for delivering the project with key milestones and identified individuals/organisat ions responsible for activities;  
 Outline of potential project risks with mitigating actions and own ers of those actions identified;  
 A summary of the approach to procurement confirming consistency with public sector requirements and the Council’s Constitutio n;  
 An estimate of expected carbon savings. A sample of projects (e.g. l arger scale projects) should provide should include ex -post monitoring to confirm  the carbon 
reductions achieved;  
 A final report detailing the work carried out and estimated resulting carbon savings likely to be achieved o ver the lifetime of the project;  
 Projects including ‘softer’ (non -physical) elements should include a specific methodology for measuring impacts associated with the measure.  
 
Other funding  
Carbon offset funds can be combined with the Energy Companies Obligation (ECO)  funding , or grant fund ing from Mayoral Energy for Londoners programmes such as 
Warmer Homes. This may enable more measures to be delivered in ‘hard to treat’ properties (such as listed properties or other  nonstandard construction types) that 
would otherwise not attract enough f unding due to the high cost of delivering these measures.  
 