P a g e  | 1 
 Haringey Climate Change Action Plan – 
A Route Map  for a Net Zero Carbon 
Haringey  
 
March 202 1 
 
  P a g e  | 2 
 Foreword from Councillor Hearn  
The significant community interest and engagement on this Action Plan has shown that there 
is high level of support from the community on tackling Climate Change. Nearly 4 in 5 
respondents said that they were very concerned about climate change and that action 
should be a priority for the borough. Climate Change is a risk to  us all  through heatwaves, 
energy costs rising and local flooding. We have demonstrated through the recent pandemic 
that as a community we can change for the better, and we can tackle emergencies together.  
In the last year we as a Haringey community have h ad to deal with the COVID emergency. It 
has impacted us all with positives and negatives. It has shown how together we can address 
an emergency. In addressing this pandemic, the Council has had to alter the way it delivers 
services, we have seen the health  and economic benefits of reductions in traffic on our 
roads, and the benefits from increasing numbers cycling. The community across the borough 
has also responded by growing community networks. Sharing knowledge, resource and 
developing projects that have  brought us closer.  
This Action Plan sets out how the Council will be a leader and how together we will deliver 
homes that are healthy, comfortable, and affordable places to heat and power . It sets out 
how as a community we can support our local businesses  with low carbon buildings and 
purchasing local goods. The Plan enables us to all share the benefits of quiet and calm 
neighbourhoods with accessible and safe, low carbon travel options. The Plan also sets out 
how we can increase the amount of power genera ted in our borough through clean and 
green energy. Most importantly, the Plan sets out how we as a community will work together 
to address the Climate Emergency.  
Since the draft Action Plan was launched a year ago, we have not stopped action on 
delivering carbon reduction projects. In the last year we have started our School Streets 
Programme, worked with local businesses on e -cargo bikes, and started the Homes for 
Haringey retrofit programmes. We are delivering policy documents such as the New Local 
Plan a nd the draft Walking and Cycling Action Plan. We launched web -based tools to help 
awareness and understanding of low carbon choices with the Ecofurb web page, and a 
Clean Car App to assess the options of electric vehicles.  
Communities with low car ownershi p are blighted by the worst air quality, and their access to 
public transport and active travel options need to be improved . This has become worse 
when public transport capacity was reduced to support social distancing. In response, the 
Council is supporti ng new walking and cycling infrastructure so we can deliver better air 
quality and carbon reduction. Delivering healthier lifestyles and increased access to jobs and 
services are also key part s of the Action Plan. The Climate Change Action Plan will also 
support our work in addressing poor quality housing and the rising number of families in fuel 
poverty, again a situation that has been exacerbated during the pandemic. The Action Plan 
can deliver a win for the many.  
For Haringey to become Net Zero Carbon, t he Council, residents, visitors, stakeholders, 
local businesses, and government need to work together to deliver the Action Plan’s 
ambition. Combating climate change is a collective endeavour, and we will continue to work 
with colleagues across the sector to share knowledge so we can keep Haringey’s target date 
of 2041 – and if we can confidently bring it forward, we will.  
Councillor Hearn, Cabinet Member for Climate Change, Equalities & Leisure   P a g e  | 3 
 Contents  
 
Foreword from Councillor Hearn  ................................ ................................ ...........................  2 
Contents  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............................  3 
Introduction and Background  ................................ ................................ ................................  4 
Haringey’s Action Plans  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 10 
The Council  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........................  10 
Housing ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............................  16 
Non-Domestic Building and Workplace Emissions  ................................ ..............................  23 
Transport  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................  28 
Energy  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................  34 
Community  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........................  38 
National and Regional Lobbying  ................................ ................................ .........................  43 
Delivering the Ambition  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 45 
Glossary ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............................  48 
 
  P a g e  | 4 
 Introduction and Background  
Our vision for Haringey in 2041  
Our 2041 vision is for a  Haringey that i s healthy and sustainable, with walking or cycling to 
local amenities and taking the long -distance trains for holidays being the norm. Roads will 
have been repurposed to give way to street -side planting, play areas, dedicated charging 
areas for electric vehicles , with safe space to get to your dest ination by using any non -
motorised set of wheels or by foot. The Council will have finished the deep retrofitting of all 
council -owned properties, resulting in lower energy bills and more control over thermal 
comfort at home and at work. All households will live in homes that are warm in the winter 
and cool in the summers ; homes that are desirable, warm, and affordable to run. Local 
energy generation is widespread and usage can be tracked , increasing awareness. 
Photovoltaic (PV) solar panels power Council b uildings, homes and businesses, and 
thousands of homes are connected to low carbon heat networks , delivering affordable, low 
carbon, and locally generated energy.  
Purpose of this Document  
Haringey has been a leader in carbon dioxide (CO 2) reduction and in its work on Climate 
Change. The borough is on target to deliver its 40% carbon reduction by 2020 from its 2005 
baseline. It has a better performance than neighbouring authority areas. But there is now 
increased awareness on the impact of  carbon and greenhouse gases as scientists have 
learnt and are seeing the impact of carbon emissions on our climate across the globe. The 
globe is now in a Climate Change Crisis and dramatic action is required.  
In March 2019, Haringey Council declared a C limate Emergency. In doing so, the Council 
committed to developing an action plan to decarbonise the borough by the earliest date that 
was both ambitious but achievable. The foundation work was done with ARUP  when the 
Council first committed to becoming a net zero -carbon borough, in the Borough Plan (2019 -
2024). ARUP provided science -based analysis  that informed the  actions that could be 
delivered and to what timeframe. Based on the Climate Emergency declaration , Haringey 
Council  revisited this initial acti on plan and agreed to bring forward both the timeline and 
scale of actions, aiming to be net zero carbon by 2041. This document sets out the actions 
as to how we can achieve this goal.  
This Action Plan  is a borough  document  which requires collective owners hip to deliver this 
level of ambition, rather than a ‘top -down’ Council approach. This is a fundamental part of 
the approach which will be needed to deliver the 2041 date.   
The Councillors  and officers  are committed to taking urgent action to deliver a net zero-
carbon borough by 2041 . Because  the Council cannot deliver it all  on its own , a large part of 
this commitment is to take a leadership role in influ encing stakeholders in Haringey;  and 
empower ing residents and businesses to mitigate their own emissio ns. But it also requires 
changes at a higher level and the Council will lobby the Mayor of London and UK 
Government to take responsibility for their own emissions and adopt amb itious legislation 
and policies. The Government’s legislation and policies shoul d be supported  with funding 
streams and increased powers to enable an increased rate of delivery at the local level.   
As these actions were developed, they were reviewed and commented on by stakeholders 
to inform the actions. The Action Plan was also challenged by leaders in the sustainability 
and built environment sectors to sense check and challenge the actions and assu mptions.  
This Action Plan will enable Haringey to become a  net zero-carbon borough  by 2041 .  
 
Background of Climate Change Globally  P a g e  | 5 
 Climate change is an increasingly global crisis, disproportionately affecting those least able 
to bear it and with the least responsibility for causing it. Extreme weather linked to climate 
change has created devastation around the world. These changes are  being felt through 
more frequently occurring short -term events such as droughts, flooding, heat waves and 
storm surges as well as longer term pressures including sea level rise and loss of productive 
land.  
The UK set a statutory target in the Climate Cha nge Act 2008 to reduce UK greenhouse gas 
(GHG) emissions by 80% from 1990 levels by 2050. In 2015, the UK committed to keeping 
emissions well below 2°C by signing up to the Paris Agreement of the United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change. The I ntergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change (IPCC)’s Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5°C , published in October 2018, 
sets out the impacts of global warming of 1.5°C above pre -industrial levels with available 
scientific, technical and socio -economic evid ence. Due to historic GHG emissions, the globe 
is set to warm significantly, with wide -ranging impacts as a result. Following a 
recommendation by the UK Committee on Climate Change (CCC), the UK legally amended 
the target in June 2019 to reduce all GHG emi ssions to net zero by 2050.  
Human pressures on the world’s ecosystems and natural resources and the changing 
climate have also resulted in a serious threat to our biodiversity, with nature eroding at 
unprecedented rates  and resulting in the acceleration o f the sixth mass extinction of wildlife . 
The Intergovernmental Science -Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services 
(IPBES) published its Global Assessment Report on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services in 
May 2019 warning of the severe loss of bi odiversity and how this will impact people. Climate 
change and large -scale biodiversity loss need to be tackled simultaneously and are both 
critical in ensuring human wellbeing, economic viability and the functioning of the natural 
world.  
In response to cl ear scientific evidence and consensus on climate change, and rising public 
concern s, Haringey Council declared a Climate E mergency in March 2019 , being one of the 
first London Councils  to do so . The Draft Haringey Climate Change Action Plan was 
published i n March 2020. Following its launch, the Action Plan underwent a process of public 
engagement to increase the awareness of the issues around climate change, to highlight the 
level of work required to deliver this ambition, to gather the views of the communi ty on the 
Action Plan, and to help prioritise actions. Over 1,000 comments were received by the 
Council as part of this process.  
Why Reduce Carbon in Haringey?  
The quickly changing climate and large -scale loss of biodiversity will impact our borough too, 
and the impacts will continue to worsen  due to the borough’s urban location , including:  
• Heat waves will intensify  due to the urban heat island effect and buildings  not being 
adapted to higher external temperatures ; 
• Impermeable built-up areas will cause surface water flooding;  
• Higher demand on the grid during extreme weather events will result in more power 
outages .  
Haringey’s incomes and living standards vary considerably  and the impacts of climate 
change will exacerbate inequality across resident s and businesses. This plan targets  a 
borough -wide reduction on carbon emissions which will improve living standards for all 
residents.   
Figure 1: Line graph showing Haringey’s proportion of emissions for the domestic, industrial 
and commercial, and transp ort sectors between 2005 and 2018. It shows that the reduction 
in emissions from 2005 to 2018 is 50% for the domestic sector (from 538 ktCO 2 to 327 
ktCO 2), 27% for the industrial and commercial sector (from 296 ktCO 2 to 176 ktCO 2), and P a g e  | 6 
 23% for the transport sector (from 201 ktCO 2 to 153 ktCO 2). (Source: Haringey Annual 
Carbon Report, 2020)  
Haringey Council has for some time been committed to reducing the borough’s emissions by 
40% by 20 20, from a 200 5 baseline (coined  as ‘40:20’). In 2018 we set a n ew target to 
become a net zero-carbon borough by 2050 . The Council ha d work ed with Arup to set out a 
road map to 2050 and , after the Council declared a climate emergency in March 2019, it 
follow ed up with a Climate Emergency Report bring ing the 2050 target  forward to the earliest 
possible date, which we now believe to be 2041.    
As every tonne of carbon is vital to be reduced, and in the context of an emergency, we 
need to deliver many of the actions urgently. Therefore, rather than accepting a linear 
decrease in carbon emissions, we have chosen to accelerate actions in response t o the 
climate emergency. For this reason, the Haringey Climate Change Action Plan proposes a 
steeper rate of decrease in areas that the Council has greater control and powers to achieve 
this. This is shown through actions such as the Council ’s operational buildings becoming Net 
Zero Carbon by 202 7, and increased action to improve the take up of active travel options.   
Although nationally the UK Government are aiming to become zero carbon by 2050, the 
Council believe s this is too late to act. By 2050, the bo rough and beyond could be 
experiencing catastrophic weather events, and displacing people from their homes. The 
Council believe that with the right support from regional and national government, that a 
2041 timeframe is achievable and therefore we should b e striving to achieve this.    
When Haringey started work on delivering a reduction on its c arbon emissions in 2005 , the 
borough’s emissions were  estimated to be at 1,041.30kt (4.5t emissions per capita). In 2017 , 
the estimated emissions for Haringey (withi n the scope of influence) were 667.7kt (2.5t per 
capita). A projected 40% reduction on 2005 levels is to achieve a reduction to 624.78 kt of 
emissions  by 2020 . 
How Has Haringey Reduced its Emissions So Far?  
Since 2011, Haringey has published its Annual Carb on Report to provide an overview of the 
carbon emissions in relation to the 40:20 target. The 2020  Annual Carbon Report shows 
that, as a borough, we have helped reduce carbon emissions from the borough by 3 6.7% 
and Haringey is on target in meeting the 40 % reduction by 2020 (also known as 40:2 0 
target ) from our 2005 baseline.  
Our historic success in reducing emissions in the borough is due to our proactive working 
with businesses, the community and other stakeholders. Our work has included undertaking 
pilot studies and projects, encouraging active travel across the borough, implementing 
various improvements to the Council’s estate through LED light fittings and other energy 
efficiency savings, installing 2,200 solar panels which generate 565,000 kWh of elect ricity 
per year, and supporting community groups in reducing their emissions through community 
energy installations, home visits and giving energy efficiency advice. Three significant 
projects that have delivered this level of carbon reduction are highligh ted below:  
• Haringey’s Smart Homes project was delivered between 2013 and 2015 for private 
homeowners. It was led by Haringey in cooperation with other north London 
boroughs under the Smart Homes scheme, with ECO funding and £6.5m funding 
from the Departme nt for Energy and Climate Change (DECC). Grants of up to £6,000 
were made available to private homeowners following a Green Homes assessment 
(with residents contributing at least 25% of the cost). With a value of £1.4m, a range 
of energy efficiency works w ere undertaken including internal and external insulation, 
boiler replacements, double/secondary glazing and draught proofing. With 4,000 
expressions of interest, a total of 1,250 grants were awarded. 72 businesses also 
took part in the equivalent Smart Bu siness project where grants of up to 50% of the P a g e  | 7 
 cost were awarded. The total Smart Homes programme saving was estimated at 
42,338 tonnes of CO 2 (1.05 tCO 2 per household), per annum.  
• The Haringey Innovation Hub was awarded £100k by Climate KIC (EU’s Knowledge 
and Innovation Centre) to support new clean technologies from universities and start -
ups to reduce carbon emissions. With over 50 technologies reviewed, 15 emerging 
clean technolo gies have been developed further for testing in the borough. Some of 
the designs have included heat recovery from sewers, gas boiler optimisation, 
combined solar PV & thermal collectors, passive ventilation and pollution reducing 
pavement. This initiative has since grown to a London -wide Better Futures initiative, 
a low carbon business incubator hub with the aim to support 100 businesses over the 
period 2017 -2020.  
• En10ergy is a social enterprise that was set up by the Muswell Hill Sustainability 
Group. It aims to promote and invest in local renewable energy and to encourage 
and facilitate the reduction in carbon emissions and waste by households, 
businesses and community buildings. The enterprise has grown and delivered 
significant carbon reduction since it s creation. En10ergy works with local households, 
businesses and schools, and has also been involved in negotiating bulk deals with 
energy suppliers. With 140 investors, of whom most live in the borough, En10ergy 
has installed solar PV panels through commu nity share offers in four locations: M&S 
store in Muswell Hill (100 panels), Methodist Church in Muswell Hill (39 panels), 
Woodside High School in White Hart Lane (150 panels) and Fortismere School in 
Muswell Hill (105 panels). In total, their installation s are now producing 128,000 kWh 
per year, having generated 290,000 kWh of energy to date. This is the type of project 
we need to nurture and grow to realise our carbon reduction targets across the 
borough.  
Although we are on track to meet Haringey’s 40:20 target, emissions need to be reduced at 
a much large r scale to achieve the new target of becoming a  net zero carbon borough by 
2041 and help the UK to meet the Paris Agreement.  
Scope of Emissions  within thi s Action Plan  
The Haringey Climate  Change Action Plan  covers Scope 1 and 2 CO 2 emissions across the 
borough, as set out by the Greenhouse Gas Protocol. The carbon emissions are categorised 
into three groups to clarify how the emissions are generated, and  who is accountable for 
these:  
Figure 2: Scope of emissions targeted within this Climate Change Action Plan . Scope 1 
includes direct emissions from sources that we own and control, including fuel combustion, 
company vehicles, and fugitive emissions. Scope 2 includes indirect emissions generated 
from the electricity and heat that we purchase and cooling we require. Scope 3 covers all 
other indirect emissions, such as waste disposal, aviation, diets, and behaviour change. In 
this action plan the Borough’s emissions are Scope 1 and 2 only, whereas the Council’s 
emissions are Scope 1 to 3.  
To ensure that this Climate Change Action Plan is realistic  and measurable , Scope 3 
emissions are not included  within the borough -wide actions and measurement s. The Council 
is unable to measure  Scope 3 emissions  across the borough, as we cannot access data on 
how many residents eat meat, buy local products, or fly.  
To demonstrate leadership, the Council will include Scope 3 emissions within its own 
targeted ac tions. The Council will develop policies around promotion of vegetarian and 
vegan food, local supply chains, and Council flights in response to this challe nge.  The 
Council will also develop its own waste management plan for waste it generates itself  in line 
with the waste hierarchy . P a g e  | 8 
 The Action Plan  does include actions to influence and educate stakeholders to reduce their  
wider  emissions . However, t hese emissions are not quantified or measured  within the zero -
carbon target of this report .  
Other sectors ha ve also been scoped out of this report. Aviation and shipping are two large 
contributors to global carbon emissions; these are not currently accounted for in national 
emissions and the borough  does not contain any ports or airports. Waste is part of the 
borough’s carbon footprint. H owever,  while  domestic waste is in  the control  of the Council  
and measured  by the North London Waste Authority , most of the commercial waste is 
collected through privately procured companies  and the Council cannot obtain this 
information .  
Whilst national targets are set for GHG  emissions, in Haringey CO 2 makes up around 85% 
of total emissions, with methane (CH 4) and nitrous oxide (NO x) making up the remaining 
15%. Targets in Haringey are set  for carbon emissions  only, however our actions will 
indirectly reduce other GHGs simultaneously .  
Trajectory to Reduce Emissions by 2041  
Figure 3. This graph shows the rate of decarbonisation required across the energy sectors  
from around 750 kilo tonnes (kt) CO 2 equivalent  to less than 100 ktCO 2 equivalent . It shows 
that some sectors, such as domestic energy and road transport, need to decarbonise as 
soon as possible as these reduction targets are more achievable now with known technology 
responses. The g raph also shows that emissions from road transport is increasing at this 
time. (Source: ARUP’s Climate Action Haringey: Towards a Zero -Carbon Future Final 
Report, November 2019)  
Under the Haringey Climate Change Action Plan, it is estimated that emissions in the 
borough would be reduced to less than 100 ktCO 2e, a reduction of over 90% from the 
baseline scenario  (Figure 3). While this still is short of net zero, it would represent a 
considerable achievement and a v ery great acceleration in the process of decarbonising the 
UK economy  and Haringey’s operational carbon footprint . The borough ’s carbon emission 
trajectory shown in this report goes only as low as can be achieved given the constraints of 
the modelling and current government projections for national infrastructure futures.  
Offsetting and/or carbon capture and storage (CCS) will be required to reach true zero.  
Key crosscutting themes have emerged during the development of the Haringey Climate 
Action Plan wh ich have been embedded in the actions and objectives. These include:  
1. The scale and impact of the climate crisis requires Haringey to be ambitious;  
2. Action on climate change at a local level is action for social justice since a changing 
climate will impact  most significantly on those who cannot avoid these impacts ;  
3. Taking action on climate change creates opportunities to deliver wider benefits for 
health, wellbeing and the local economy;  
4. This Action Plan is  an evidenced -based approach, but the scope of ou r ambition 
should also extend beyond what is easily measure d by the Council. M any of these 
factors, such as aviation and food, have a significant impact on climate change , but 
are not included in this plan ;  
5. Delivery of a target to be net Zero Carbon by 20 41 cannot be achieved by the 
Council working alone . All the borough’s stakeholders will need to support this 
ambition – residents, businesses and visitors. The Council will need to lobby central 
government and others to secure the action and investment nee ded at a national and 
regional level;  
6. Achieving a carbon neutral future is as much about culture change as it is about 
infrastructure. Communication and engagement with stakeholders will be of 
fundamental importance. To do this in a credible way , the Coun cil must demonstrate 
leadership in terms of its own estate and operations.  P a g e  | 9 
 7. There are significant challenging issues ahead to address to deliver this carbon 
reduction ambition.  With strong views on all sides.  These include addressing 
emissions from counci l staff vehicles which are used for service delivery (social 
workers etc), reducing carbon from staff car parking across the public sector 
(doctors , school workers,  and school governors,  etc), and reprioritisation of highways 
space for active travel and co mmunity uses.  The Council recognises these 
challenges and will focus engagement work with those most affected by these 
challenges, to bring forward solutions . 
Structure of the Report  
This Haringey Climate Change Action Plan  is informed by the recommendations set out by 
Arup’s Technical reports which are published on the Council’s web pages . This work was 
initiated with the amb ition of becom ing a zero -carbon borough by 2050 . This work has been 
reviewed in light of the Climate Emergency and was concluded with the ‘ Climate Action 
Haringey: Towards a Zero -Carbon Future ’ Final Report,  which was finalised in November 
2019 . 
The Haring ey Climate Change Action Plan is structured as follows:  
• The s ix focus areas on reducing carbon emissions for the Climate Change Action 
Plan:  
o Council ; 
o Housing ; 
o Workplaces ; 
o Transport ; 
o Energy ; 
o Community.  
 
• Specific sections on Delivering the Ambition:  
o Governance and monitoring ; 
o Financing ; 
o Lobbying asks to government and the Greater London Authority (GLA).  
Each focus area is set out with a context, overall objective and set of actions.  
  P a g e  | 10 
 Haringey’s Action Plans  
The Council  
Overall Objective: Reduce the operative carbon footprint of the Council to net zero by 202 7 
The Council’s corporate buildings contribute approximately 0.8% of the borough’s emissions . 
The major sources responsible for emissions in the borough are outside t he Council’s control 
and will require significant investment and work by private businesses and residents who will 
need incentives to achieve this. It will also require a greatly accelerated rate of 
decarbonisation in the national generation of electricity  and road transport at a London -wide 
level. But a s a local authority, we recognise that we have a responsibility to take positive 
action  and provide strong leadership on averting the dangerous effects of climate change.  
This is the reason why the Council w ill work harder to achieve meaningful carbon reduction 
within a shorter timeframe.  
The Council has set the date for a zero -carbon council at 2027. This will include core council 
operational buildings and all transport -related activities undertaken by the Council in the 
delivery of core services. The rest of the buildings from which the Council delivers services 
and is directly responsible for the energy bills (such as leisure centres, libraries and schools) 
will be net zero carbon as soon as it is possible . To bring this forward, the Council will 
publish a work plan for each building or site by the end of 2021, setting out how this can be 
achieved. To support this, the Council will require new council buildings to be zero carbon on 
site from the date of ado ption of the Action Plan. Alongside these measures, the Council will 
start delivering a large -scale retrofitting programme across the Council’s buildings, while 
removing carbon from the vehicles delivering front -line services as soon as it can.    
The Coun cil will share learning on what works on projects, it will support the supply chain as 
it develops, seek to attract green investment into the borough, and show leadership in our 
ambition and delivery. As a publicly funded organisation, we will do this in a n efficient, cost 
effective, and responsible way. In doing this we will deliver the borough’s carbon reduction 
ambition, improve local air quality, and demonstrate strong financial management by 
reducing the Council’s future energy spend.  
Historic performa nce  
Haringey Council has made significant efforts to reduce emissions from our estate and 
operations. In 2008 we undertook our first Carbon Reduction Plan and since then we have 
reduced our emissions by 36% compared to 2005 levels1.  
The 2008 Plan set ou t a strategic and planned approach to reducing carbon emissions from 
our estate and operations. The Plan targeted the areas of the Council’s activity which 
contribute d most to our carbon emissions (e.g. , swimming pools and leisure centres, car 
parks, the vehicle fleet, offices, and community centres).  
Since  Haringey’s F irst Annual Carbon Report in 2011, the Council has undertaken a 
multitude of climate initiatives. The key measures deli vered through the Plan included:  
• 38 solar PV systems installed on the roofs of Council schools, housing and corporate 
sites, which generated 380,000  kWh of electricity  in 2019/2020 , saving our sites 
around £45k in electricity ;  
• Boiler upgrades across the Corporate estates ; 
• Approximately 5 0% of street lighting upgrade d to LED   
• LED lighting in main Council buildings and schools;  
 
1 BEIS data  P a g e  | 11 
 • Electric staff pool car and new car club installed and open to all staff;  
• Active Travel programmes across the borough including community grants and 
behaviour chan ge education in schools and community centres;  
• Energy improvements included into the specification of refurbishment at George 
Meehan House ; and 
• School Streets Plan across the borough . 
The Council bought £ 5.2m of electricity and gas for the corporate estate  in 2018/19. This 
covers energy for schools, corporate buildings (including libraries, mortuaries, park 
buildings)  and operational buildings. It does not include Homes for Haringey. Reducing our 
energy consumption will improve our environmental performance , and reduce our revenue 
spend on energy.  
Key partners  which are required  to deliver  this vision  include providers of currently 
outsourced services such as Veolia and other members of the Council’s supply chain.  
Three -Stage Delivery of Zero Carbon Council   
To deliver this level of ambition of a Zero Carbon Council, the Council will deliver a three -
stage process. Alongside this, we will work to demonstrate a leadership role in reducing the 
Council’s emissions.    
As the first stage in this approach the Coun cil has identified its core operational buildings 
together with the transport emissions from the Council’s fleet and the Council will make 
these Net Zero Carbon by 2027.  
The Council will transition transport -related activities that are directly related to front -line 
service delivery (such as Council fleet vehicles) to zero carbon fuels. This will be achieved 
by reviewing the type of vehicles required to deliver these front -line services, and by working 
to replace carbon intensive vehicles with active travel options, or zero carbon vehicles where 
a viable option exists.  For in -house fleet this will be delivered by 2027.  For out -sourced fleet 
activities this will be undertaken at each cont ract renewal, and for staff who use their own 
vehicles for service delivery the Council will work with them to transition as soon as is 
feasible. The Council will bring forward a plan for the out -sourced fleet activities by the end 
of 2021 setting out esti mated timeframes.  
Secondly , the Council will review all its corporate operation s. These cover  the buildings that 
are owned by the Council, buildings from where Council services are delivered, buildings 
that have Council employees in them, and where the Cou ncil pays the energy bills  – as well 
as the activities carried out from these buildings . This will include schools, libraries, leisure 
centres, depots, adult centres, and children’s centres, as well as the Council and Homes for 
Haringey’s offices. However,  it will not include Council homes , which are covered separately 
by this Action Plan . Each one of these buildings will have an individual plan setting out the 
measures required, and the cost of delivery to get the building to zero carbon. We aim to 
have th ese plans in place by the end of 2021.  
Each of these buildings will be reviewed in terms of:  
a) consuming  less carbon in carrying out the operation itself, distinct from the building ; 
b) improving the energy efficiency standards of the building – double glazing , wall 
insulation etc.  
c) improving current heating and hot water systems to reduce carbon emissions, while 
improving air quality and operational costs – new boilers, the use of air source heat 
pumps etc.  
d) reviewing and maximising the delivery of renewable ene rgy generation in each 
building – solar PV panels, solar thermal panels, heat pumps, etc.  
e) intention to reduce staff car parking spaces and provide EV charging points to reduce 
associated travel emissions.  P a g e  | 12 
 Through reviewing and working to implement measures on the Council’s buildings, the 
consumption of each building will be significantly reduced. To achieve the net Zero Carbon 
standard, all remaining energy required (gas and electricity) for the building wi ll be 
purchased from a certified Green Energy Supplier. To demonstrate true additionality of 
renewable energy generation, the Council will work with other authorities across London to 
develop a business case for a Power Purchase Agreement (PPA) with the op portunity for 
direct investment in renewable generation.   
Any Council new build projects that the Council delivers for schools and operational use will 
be designed and constructed to be Zero Carbon on site and maximise renewable energy 
generation. This is  already being designed into new buildings and planned to be delivered 
on sites such as the new council depot at Marsh Lane, the redevelopment at Osborne Grove 
Nursing Home  and the residential new build at Edith Road . 
After 2027, the final stage will be to switch energy suppliers from carbon fuels (grid 
electricity, gas, diesel) and fund the purchase of green energy. This may include green 
electricity, green gas, electric vehicles powered by renewable electricity. A ny services that 
have no choice but to emit carbon for core service delivery (such as flights  required for social 
services ) these will be offset through local offsetting schemes with a verified addition al 
carbon reduction. These will be projects that have not yet identified funding and would not 
happen without this funding.   
The Council will report on this in the Annual Carbon Report, which is required in the 
Council’s Constitution. The report will highlight the work that the Council has done, alongside 
stakeho lder projects.   
Council Actions  
Objective C1: Work towards a zero -carbon footprint of the Council in its operational  
buildings (not including housing or commercial property) and transport , with core 
council buildings being net zero by 202 7.  
The Council’s corporate buildings contribute approximately 0.8% of the borough’s emissions. 
The Council has full control of these and will lead by example to be zero carbon as soon as it 
can for the whole stock, but core buildings and all transport emissio ns by 2027.  
• Action owner: Property Services / Carbon Management  
• Cost: In order to build to a zero -carbon specification , new corporate buildings across 
our corporate estate are likely to increase in the magnitude of <5%. Refurbishments 
to corporate building s will be considered on a case -by-case basis as part of the 
Council ’s review process. Energy prices are currently volatile. It is expected that by 
2025 , the price of electricity will be between 11% and 67% higher based on 2018 
prices , and in relation to ga s the price variance could see an increase of 55% based 
on 2018 prices. Switching to a Green Energy Supplier for electricity across the 
Corporate Estate has already been agreed within the current contracts and will only 
increase bills by 0.3% (£17k) in yea r 1. 
• Measurable metrics: Annual utilities (Elec tricity  & Gas) consumption data and % 
green energy supplied , and kilowatts of annual electricity generation on Council -
owned properties  
• Potential carbon reduction : Significant in terms of the Council’s perform ance, and 
leadership role. But the Council ’s corporate buildings and schools only account for 
approx. 0.8% of the borough’s overall carbon footprint.  
• The detailed actions for Objective C1 are listed below.  
1. Action:  For the Council’s core operational buildin gs, and all transport related 
activities for service delivery to be net zero carbon, by 2027. Action  owners 
are Carbon Management / Strategic Property Unit . Note:  funding in place for 
action plan ; business case to be developed and funded.   P a g e  | 13 
 2. For the Council to move to 100% green tariffs  (electricity , gas and fuel ) by 
2027. Owners : Carbon Management / Strategic Property Unit. Note: d elivered 
by energy efficiency and green tariffs (+0.3% on elec tricity ), there is 
increasing demand from the schools to switch.  Energy contracts are in three -
year cycles.  
3. To develop a Power Purchase Agreement (which would mean direct 
investment in renewables) with an energy supplier for the Council’s Electrical 
needs by 2025.  Owner: Carbon Management.  
4. Deliver a  net Zero Carbon Action Plan for all corporate buildings (including 
schools and leisure centres) . Start to deliver measures based on the local 
business cases. Deadline: By 2022. Owner: Carbon Management. Note: This 
will be picked up as it is a requirement secured in the new energy contracts.  
5. All new Council corporate building projects to be zero carbon  or carbon 
positive on site . And that the Councils New Ways of Working (NWOW) 
incorporates carbon reduction as a key objective. F rom 2021. Owner: Carbon 
Management / Property Services.  
6. All refurbishments of council buildings to maximise opportunities for carbon 
reduction, through  lean, clean, green and seen measures, targeting an EPC B 
standard . Roll out a boiler replace ment programme in core buildings.  From 
2021. Owner: Carbon Management / Strategic Property Unit.   
7. For all new build and major refurbishments to include a ‘real time’ usage and 
generation display in reception areas (Ongoing). Owner: Carbon 
Management / Stra tegic Property Unit. Note : New build monitoring is required 
by the new London Plan , this is key for awareness and cultural change.  
8. Seek to expand the number of council solar installations and work to support 
community installations on council assets.  From 2021. Owner : Carbon 
Management, Strategic Property Unit.  
 
Objective C2 - To reduce the carbon emissions from the council fleet and  service -
required  transportation through active travel electric vehicle initiatives and for the 
fleet to be zero emission by 202 7 
Zero emission vehicles, including two -wheeled transport, should be prioritised when 
procuring new fleets. This should be supported by high qual ity facilities  for active travel 
users . 
• Action Owner: Carbon Management / Fleet Management / HR / Parking  
• Cost: Business cases will be made on the Corporate Fleets and the switch to EVs. 
Although active travel infrastructure may increase costs, a healthier work force would 
be delivered with active travel.  
• Measurable metrics: Number of Council staff and teacher permits issued; % of staff 
taking active travel options to work (Staff Travel Su rvey); Number of vehicles and % 
of zero emitting vehicles in the Council Fleet.  
• Potential carbon reduction : Small, but will also deliver significant air quality 
improvements and a healthier work force through active travel options.  
• The detailed actions for  Objective C2 are listed below.  
1. To annually, review, update, and promote the Active Travel Plan to all staff  
(Ongoing ). Owner: Active Travel / Carbon Management . 
2. Deliver n ew accessible cycling and shower facilities in all new council build 
projects which a re a base for staff, from 2020. Owner: Carbon Management / 
Strategic Property Unit.  
3. To continue the delivery of a cleaner and a zero -emission fleet for all in -house 
vehicles. Support staff who use vehicles for service delivery to transition to 
Zero Carbon vehicles as soon as possible. By 2025. Owner: All Services. P a g e  | 14 
 Note: In line with the Ultra Low Emission Vehicle  Action Plan.  Some of the 
fleet will be acquired by applying for a grant for e -cargo bikes from 
Department for Transport in 2020.  
4. Review the Parkin g Policy and review all staff parking spaces and permits  
with the objective of reducing overall car parking spaces and permits. This will 
improve air quality, deliver carbon reduction , and more public space. Work 
with staff to increase active and zero carb on transport travel for and to work. 
From  2021 . Owner: Highways , Human Resources , Facilities Management , 
Planning . Note: This strategy will be underpinned by engaging with staff 
members on why people drive to work, how they choose to travel can change 
and what the impacts will be.  Space will continue to be provided for blue 
badge holders and essential car users.  
5. No new car parking in Council Buildings and remove all parking spaces for 
staff in schools, except for key users (Blue Badges) and deliv eries.  From 
2020. Owner: Strategic Property Unit  / Parking . Note: To review the key users 
list by removing teachers.  
6. All parking bays on the corporate estate to include fully accessible charging 
infrastructure for electric  vehicles and e -bikes from 2020. O wner: Strategic 
Property Unit / Parking .  
Objective C3 - To reduce the carbon emissions from the wider aspects of the 
Council’s operations and investments  
The Council’s wider impact is significant to leading by example, and to influence our partners 
to imp lement change.  
• Action Owner : Finance / HR / Carbon Management  
• Cost: Projects may increase in capital costs, but often deliver revenue savings. To be 
assessed on a case -by-case basis.    
• Measurable metrics: % of key decisions that have considered carbon red uction;  % 
of the Council finance portfolio investing in low carbon investments.  
• Potential Carbon reduction : Significant, as the Council investments (such as pension) 
have the potential to help grow the low carbon industrial sector and reduce indirect 
Coun cil emissions.   
• The detailed actions for Objective C3 are listed below.  
1. All council decisions need to factor in carbon reduction.  Ongoing. Owner: 
Carbon Management , Corporate Policy , Cabinet . 
2. To review the Council ’s banking and pension investments, ensure they are 
investing in low -carbon investment schemes and avoiding carbon -based 
industries where this is consistent with our fiduciary duty . To measure the 
carbon intensity and footprint of the Council’s pension invest ments and 
monitor for improvements.  Ongoing . Owner: Finance , Carbon Management , 
Procurement . Note: The Pension Fund has over 50% of its equity investment 
in low carbon investment fund at the moment and plans are in place to 
increase this to 100% of equity investments in low carbon strategies in 2021. 
Low carbon investments reduce the fund exposure to carbon emissions.  
3. Promote vegetarian and vegan foods through meals procurement and cafes 
that the Council lets  from 2020 . Owner: Procurement / Carbon Managemen t. 
4. For the Council and public bodies to support the local supply chain, including 
food suppliers, and other businesses as part of carbon reduction programme, 
from 202 0. Owner: Carbon Management / Procurement. Note: Subject to 
approval by the relevant service area. Supports local wealth agenda.  
5. Promote vegetarian and vegan food that is locally produced at Council events 
through our procurement strategies , from 2021. Owner: All Services / 
Procurement.  P a g e  | 15 
 6. To include carbon reduction  as a core requirement in all procurements  and 
seek to set targets to reduce embodied energy  from 2021. Owner: 
Procurement / Carbon Management . Note: This is included in the social value 
tool kit and where appropriate will be a contractual obligation.  
7. Ensu re all projects and programmes have considered carbon reduction during 
their design, and that all projects and programmes over £1m deliver a carbon 
reduction . Deadline 2020 . Owner: Finance / Carbon Management / Projects . 
8. Promote the Council’s policy of fli ghts only being allowed for key services 
(such as coroners, social workers etc.) . Deadline: 2025 . Owner: Finance / 
Carbon Management / HR . Note: p olicy is no flights may be booked for 
destinations served by rail (including Eurostar).  
 
Objective C4 - To inc rease awareness and empower staff to take positive carbon  
reduction decisions  
Awareness raising is vital for staff to take ownership of, and deliver, carbon reduction 
initiatives, as well as to instigate behavioural change.  
• Action Owner : HR / Carbon Management / Staff  
• Cost: <£5k and existing staff time  
• Measurable metrics : Number of staff events focused on sustainability each year  
• Potential carbon reduction : Medium. Many staff are local residents, and this has the 
potential to engage and support wider  stakeholders through  action and information. It 
increases ownership of the agenda issue throughout the organisation.  
• The detailed actions for Objective C4 are listed below.  
1. Work with HR and the Unions to include environmental standards (like 
equalities) w ithin all staff job descriptions and contracts.  Deadline: 2020 . 
Owner: Carbon Management / HR / Unions . 
2. Deliver training and guest speaker events on carbon reduction in life / work 
choices . Promote behaviour change ideas around carbon reduction including 
lifestyle choices.  From 2021. Owner: Carbon Management . Note : This will 
form part of the initial engagement period in 2020 and continue from the 
adoption of the Action Plan.   
3. Work with the staff networks and Unions to promote environmental schemes 
and progr ammes  from 2020 . Owner: Carbon Management / HR / Unions . 
4. Monitor and publish our performance on carbon reduction  in the Annual 
Carbon Report , by 2021. Owner: Carbon Management / Comms.  Note: This 
has been published annually since 2011 and will be adapted to include 
performance on carbon reduction against the Action Plan.  
5. To develop and deliver a Council waste management plan. To  focus staff and 
council systems to follow the waste hierarchy: to reduce, reuse, repurpose, 
repair resources before recyc ling, with recovering or disposing as a last 
resort . By 2021. Owner: Waste Services , Facilities Management, 
Procurement . Note: This supports the emerging Single Use Plastic Policy and 
new ways of working  and should also include office furniture, electronic s and 
food waste .  
  P a g e  | 16 
 Housing  
Overall Objective: Achieve an EPC B on average in all in domestic buildings by 2041  
The borough ’s homes make up 50% of the borough’s total carbon emissions , through 
electricity demand and heating requirements.  This  is by far the biggest sector we need to 
target if we are to deliver our borough Net Zero Carbon ambition. N ew homes are an 
opportunity for the adoption of best practice  and can minimis e emissions  easily as they are 
often built to a high standard. The bigger challenge , technically and financially, is the ability 
to reduce emissions within the existing building housing stock. Although the cost of action is 
expensive, analysis shows that over the same time period it is only slightly more than  the 
cost of busines s as usual.  
The Council owns approximately 17 per cent of the borough’s housing stock, which is 
managed by Homes for Haringey. These homes amount to approx imately  7-8% of the 
borough’s total emissions. And the Council can deliver projects to reduce these e missions to 
benefit the residents in these homes. The challenge lies where the Council has a more 
constrained  influence within the wider borough stakeholders – landlords and private 
homeowners. The Council needs to be supported by regional and national government to 
increase our influence, both with legislation and funding opportunities to help residents bring 
forward positive measures. In response to this, the Council will lobby relevant bodies will 
reflect these barriers and work in partnership with homeowners to encourage and enable 
action.  
Co-benefits of healthy, warm homes  
Insulating homes with passive design solutions will deliver hea lthier homes for people to live 
in. Making people feel thermally comfortable in their homes mean they are less at risk of 
physical and mental health issues and will be more productive working.  
The Council will work to insulate homes and ensure they are ve ntilated properly, ensuring 
passive solutions are installed before relying on renewable energy technologies.  
Figure 4: Domestic carbon emissions, comparing emissions in 2015 and 2041. It shows that 
half the emissions in 2015 came from domestic heating (240 ,000 k ilo tonnes (kt) of  CO 2). 
This needs to be reduced drastically to 28,000 kt CO 2 in 2041, when it is expected that half 
the domestic emissions will still be due to heating homes.  
Historic Performance  
The Council’s  capacity to improve social housing has been demonstrated by the Decent 
Homes programme  improvements to 11,000 homes over  a ten -year programme to ensure 
that homes met the minimum comfort, and health and safety standards set out by the 
governments’ Decent Homes criteria . Emission savings associated with interventions, such 
as boiler replacement, insulation and double glazing, are estimated to be approximately 
5,000 tCO 2/year.  
Housing Challenge Ahead  
The majority of existing homes in Haringey will still be s tanding in 2041 , with current  UK 
estimates showing that 80 -85% of homes in the UK will still exist in 2050. Currently, homes 
in the borough have an average Environmental Performance Certificate (EPC) of D  (see 
Figure 5) . To achieve significant reductions i n people’s heating, electricity and cooling use, P a g e  | 17 
 we all need to  undertake deep retrofits across our homes,  ensure all new homes2 are built to 
zero carbon standards , and focus on changing  people’s energy behaviour .  
Whole -home d eep retrofits will include insulating walls internally or externally, upgrading all 
windows and doors, insulating roofs, floors and heating systems,  upgrading ventilation 
systems  and connect ing homes to low carbon heat and electricity sources.  When retrofits 
are completed, installers need to explain how heating and ventilation systems operate 
(ideally through web links to hand over to future residents) and highlight how to reduce 
energy use.  Potential financial models to help residents to fund their retrofit interventions wil l 
be investigated.  
New homes will need to meet the Zero Carbon Standard to avoid requiring a further retrofit 
in the next 10 years. Haringey adopted the new carbon offset price of £95 on 1 January 
2020 and will progress the implementation of a higher carbo n offset price.  
Figure 5: Chart showing the spread of energy performance data of all homes in Haringey  
(Source: EPC data from CROHM Parity Projects database) . Only a small proportion of 
homes have an EPC of B or better , with the majority of homes achieving  EPC D.  
The Council will work with key partners to deliver the housing targets , including Homes for 
Haringey , Parity Projects, the Mayor’s Retrofit Accelerator programme, SHINE, Local Energy 
Advice Partnership,  housing associations , landlords, and private homeowners .  
Housing Actions  
Objective H1 - Programme of deep retrofitting 1,300 council -owned homes per year to 
achieve an average of EPC of B by 2035  (or equivalent standard) . 
Council -owned housing equates to approximately 8% of the borough’s emi ssions. However, 
the council has direct influence over these emissions.  
• Action Owner : Property Services / Carbon Management / Housing / Homes for 
Haringey  
• Cost: HRA capital funding of £101m was agreed by  Cabinet in February 2020, 
covering the cost for the Affordable Energy Programme  to bring all council -owned 
properties to EPC C. Further work and funding will be required to cover retrofitting 
properties to EPC B.  
• Measurable metrics : % of council -owned housing units at or above EPC B  
• Potential carbon reducti on: Significant. By 2035 Council housing retrofits to have 
reduced energy use in these homes by 68GWh per year, compared with 2015, 
delivering an average reduction of 20% per property.  
• The detailed actions for Objective H1 are listed below.  
1. Implement an estate -wide pilot scheme of at least 150 homes with the ability 
to be replicated and scaled up to reach peak installations of 1,300 homes per 
year by 2035. Integrate a post -retrofit handover to train users on how to use 
their home the most eff iciently.  Deadline: 2021 . Owner: Carbon Management 
/ Housing  / Homes for Haringey . Note: Develop a model that can deliver quick 
and significant energy improvements and use Decent Homes programme as 
a basis. Currently developing an Energiesprong pilot project.  
2. Review contract KPIs and programme to integrate ambition for an average of 
EPC B into  maintenance and regeneration programmes. Improve all existing 
housing stock bought by the Council to EPC B before occupation of these 
units.  Deadline: 2022. Owner: Carbon Management / Housing  / Homes for 
Haringey . 
 
2 The London Plan target for Haringey is to build 52,000 homes by 2050. The next ten years we will 
need to build 1, 502 homes per year (Policy H1, New London Plan).  P a g e  | 18 
 3. Work up a delivery plan to achieve an ave rage of EPC B rating for all council -
owned residential properties by 2035, reviewing void strategies, existing EPC 
data from CROHM tool. Owner: Carbon Management / Housing / Homes for 
Haringey . Note: Use data from CROHM tool by Parity Projects with input f rom 
Homes for Haringey.  
4. Set up a follow -up delivery plan to retrofit council -owned housing up to EPC A 
by 2041, where practically feasible.  Owner: Carbon Management . Note: 
Relies on future technologies to retrofit, no costing has been undertaken for 
this. 
Objective H2 – Deliver a net zero carbon housing portfolio for the first Council new 
build homes delivered by 2022.  
The Council has direct influence over these emissions and should therefore ensure that 
these homes are zero carbon upon completion.  
• Action O wner : Carbon Management / Housing  
• Cost: It is estimated that to deliver zero -carbon units range between 3.6 -6.8% above 
baseline of delivering a business as usual with gas boilers scenario. Long -term 
savings for occupiers would reduce risk of debts occurrin g.   
• Measurable metrics : Average SAP score of Council new housing portfolio  
• Potential carbon reduction : Delivering new build schemes to the zero -carbon 
standard would deliver a 65% reduction in carbon emissions compared to the current 
benchmark of a 35% im provement to Building Regulations.  
• The detailed actions for Objective H2 are listed below.  
1. Develop a Council Standard Housing Design Guide, setting out sustainable 
design including carbon reduction principles  by 2020 . Owner: Carbon 
Management / Housing . 
2. Embed carbon reduction  and minimising overheating risk  as essential criteri a 
within all tenders in the house -building programme  by 2021. Owner: Carbon 
Management / Procurement / Housing . Note: Through the social value tool kit 
and liaison with the service areas, this will be embedded within all appropriate 
contracts.  
3. Reduce carbon emissions in council -bought new build properties to 100% 
improvement on Building Regulations Part L, where feasible . Deadline: 2 022. 
Owner: Housing / Carbon Management . Note: To consider both operational 
and embodied carbon emissions.  
4. Monitor energy performance and occupancy in all Council new build 
properties to review and inform future zero -carbon house building portfolios 
and tenants  by 2022. Owner: Housing . 
Objective H3  – Provide technical advice on energy efficiency to 6,000 fuel poor and 
able-to-pay domestic property owners and occupiers per year to support Objective 
H4. 
Separate approaches and funding mechanisms would be required to effectively support both 
fuel poor and able -to-pay residents.  
• Action Owner : Carbon Management  
• Cost: There would be no capital or programme costs by the Council. The 
engagement with approx. 86,000 households should be done at a regional level. And 
it being designed with the GLA. This action will be supported by the work currently 
being undertaken by the Council in partnership with Parity Projects in a scheme 
funded by the Department of Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy to increase 
retrofit uptake in the able -to-pay market through suppo rt for supply chain co -
ordination.   P a g e  | 19 
 • Measurable metrics: Number of training/advice sessions per year; % of homes 
engaged with through home visits  
• Potential carbon reduction : Reduced energy costs delivering 260GWh/year reduction 
in energy consumption by 20 35 if all non -council owned homes are improved to EPC 
C, equal to 16% of domestic energy demand in 2015.  
• The detailed actions for Objective H3 are listed below.  
1. Lobby the GLA to coordinate London -wide provision of technical energy 
efficiency advice (to ach ieve delivery of advice to 6,000 private 
households per year across Haringey)  by 2020 . Owner: Carbon 
Management . 
2. Identify the streets/areas with the greatest potential for energy efficiency 
improvements including energy generation. To inform a neighbourhoo d 
approach to delivering education and awareness campaigns to retrofitting. 
By 2021 . Owner: Carbon Management / Housing  / Homes for Haringey . 
Note: Parity Projects’ database will enable this analysis to take place. 
Analysis for feasibility of solar PV in Haringey will also feed into this, with 
London’s Solar Opportunity Map and London Building Stock Model. 
Campaigns could be delivered with help of community groups.  
3. Develop homeowner guidance to advise on domestic improvements 
required to reach EPC B, and specifically develop guidance for retrofitting 
heritage assets  by 2025 . Owner: Housing / Carbon Management / 
Heritage . Note: Link to Parity projects . 
4. Support ‘smart retrofit academies’ to train local builders and apprentices 
in retrofit techniques for modern and old buildings, digital innovations and 
natural building materials. Reskilling as existing carbon related jobs 
decline. By 2025 . Owner: Economic Development . Note: To be put 
explicitly into Economic Development Strategy.  
5. Deliver external training  sessions for homeowners and aim to reach at 
least 37,000 homes by 2026, targeting a mixture of unit and tenure types.  
Owner: Carbon Management / Housing . Note: Partner with local initiatives 
such as RetrofitWorks, LEAP and SHINE London.  
Objective H4 – Provide and identify funding assistance to support delivery of 
improvements in privately -owned residential properties.  
Separate approaches and funding mechanisms would be required to effectively support both 
fuel poor and able -to-pay residents.  
• Action Owner : Finance / Regeneration / Carbon Management / Borough 
Stakeholders  
• Cost: To attract this level of funding  for private homeowners , the Council would need 
to coordinate private -sector funding and work up business cases for external funding, 
loans and investme nt. External capital cost of £660m (average of £7,700 per 
property) would be required for privately -owned properties.  
• Measurable metrics: Number and value of grants and/or loans awarded by the 
Council to homeowners; % improvement on EPC score and reduction  in energy by 
residential property following grant  
• Potential carbon reduction : Minor but needed . Reduced energy costs delivering 
260GWh/year reduction in energy consumption by 2050 if full retrofit of private 
housing sector is achieved. This represents 16% of domestic energy demand in 
2015.  
• The detailed actions for Objective H4 are listed below.  
1. Lobb y government to increase homeowner funding to retrofit their 
properties to EPC B and cut VAT on refurbishment, repair and P a g e  | 20 
 maintenance from 20% to 5%. Deadline: 2020 . Owner: Carbon 
Managemen t. 
2. Identify external funding streams and help the bidding for fundi ng to 
enable delivery of EPC B across all existing housing stock . temporary 
housing, hostels and bed & breakfasts.  From  2021 . Owner: Finance / 
Carbon Management / Housing . 
3. Build internal business cases to embed carbon reduction in all Council 
projects to d eliver EPC B  by 2023 . Owner: Procurement / Finance . Note: 
Strategic Procurement will review business cases to ensure this has been 
considered.  
4. Seek appropriate finance models for leaseholders on council estates that 
are undergoing retrofits, and ensure the y are able to ‘opt in’ to the works 
to ensure a whole -building or whole -estate approach.  From 2021. Owner: 
Legal / Carbon Management / Housing / Homes for Haringey . Note: A 
different model may need to be developed for fuel poor households.  
5. Advertise fundin g and loan opportunities to individuals and stakeholder  
groups . From 2021 . Owner: Housing / Carbon Management . 
6. Partner with external parties to help deliver larger scale retrofit projects 
across the private sector  by 2025 . Owner: Regeneration / Housing / 
Procurement . Note: Such as RetrofitWorks and housing associations.  
7. Explore the setting up of local pop -up advice centres or stalls to help 
residents and businesses with retrofitting and installing renewable energy 
technologies.  2021 -2022. Owner: Carbon Mana gement / Regeneration / 
Town Centres . 
Objective H5 – Work with landlords to go beyond the minimum standard of Energy 
Performance required, and aim for an EPC C standard for private sector housing by 
2035.  
Having a clear framework of national regulations and enforcement mechanisms are key to 
delivering objectives in the housing sector. This is especially important as the objectives set 
out in this Action Plan are more ambitious than that set at regional and national level.  
• Action Owner : Environmental Health  
• Cost: New Government ask of £140k to fund identification of non -conforming 
propertie s. External capital cost to improve failing properties is £320m to be paid for 
privately to retrofit 43,000 privately ren ted homes (which is a proportion of the £660m 
estimate for all private homes in H4).  
• Measurable metrics:  Number of Private Rented Sector properties that have applied 
for a property licence which have a rating of less than E and the action taken by 
those La ndlords to ensure compliance voluntarily or through the use of statutory 
interventions ; Number of landlords and letting agents who have attended training 
events per year on how to achieve more energy efficient homes . 
• Potential carbon reduction : Current leg islation only requires compliance to EPC level 
E, so carbon reduction will be low until MEES are increased. Energy efficiency works 
in the private rented sector to bring all properties up to a high EPC C could deliver 
120GWh of energy savings.  
• The detailed  actions for Objective H 5 are listed below.  
1. Lobby national government to enable Councils to recharge the true costs 
of enforcing this legalisation and revise minimum EPC rating required at 
point of sale/let for all private sector homes to EPC B by 2035 (current 
requirement is EPC E) . Deadline 2021. Owner: Carbon Management . 
Note: Can use benefits and existing data on how energy efficiently is 
delivered.  P a g e  | 21 
 2. Develop approach to identify non -compliant properties and target these 
properties to comply  by 2021 . Owner: Environmental Health / Building 
Control . Note: Initial analysis of CROHM tool to inform approach.  
3. Identify penalties and incentives for landlords to comply with legislation  
and go beyond the minimum requirements , by 2021 . Owner: Carbon 
Management / Building Control . Note: Review against the cost to retrofit 
properties.  
4. Require all landlords of privately rented homes to provide an EPC 
certificate where applicable when applying for a property licence , from 
2021. Owner: Housing / Licence.  
5. Organise training events for estate agents , landlords  and land lord 
associations on EPC requirements and advice on how to retrofit  
properties. B y 2022. Owner: Carbon Management / Housing . 
Objective H6 - Achieve zero carbon in new and redeveloped homes  on site .  
Ensuring new homes are built to the highest fabric and energy efficiency standards the first -
time round, will circumvent these homes needing to be retrofitted in the future.  
• Action Owner : Carbon Management / Planning Policy  
• Cost: <£10k gathering evidence, specific campaigns etc (to be funded through the 
Local Plan review funding). This action requires reprioritisation of existing work 
programmes to enable delivery.  
• Measurable metrics (Data Owner) : Average % of carbon emissions saved on site in 
residential schemes permitted per year  
• Potential carbon reduction : Significant. Reduced energy costs in operation and 
avoided cost of future retrofit works.  
• The detailed actions for Objective H 6 are listed below.  
1. Lobby national government and GLA to improve fabric requirements in 
Building Regulations Part L beyond October 2019 proposals, before 2025 
which requires carbon emission modelling software in new developments; 
Remove VAT on refurbishments; and change policy to allow for energy 
efficiency measures to be installed in buildings in conservation areas.  
Deadline: 2021. Owner: Carbon Management . Note: To update existing SAP 
modelling which does not accurately represent carbon emissions in 
developments.  
2. Deliver training for planning staff and proactively engage in the planning 
process to deliver policy requirements  by 2021 . Owner: Carbon Management .
 Note: This will ensure that carbon reduction strategies are also 
considered in minor applications.  
3. Produce new planning guidance on overheating, green roofs and on -site 
carbon reduction measures, and update the Sustainable Design  and 
Construction SPD  by 2021 . Owner: Carbon Management / Planning Policy . 
Note: Within remit of existing Carbon Management staff.  
4. Update the cost of carbon to a price that incentivises on -site reduction and 
review every 2 years  from 2020 . Owner: Carbon Ma nagement / Planning 
Policy . Note: First increase to £95/tCO 2 took effect on 1st January 2020. 
Further review underway following the publication of the Cost of Carbon 
Report by LETI (May 2020).  
5. Deliver updated retrofit design guides for conservation areas to set out the 
recommended approach to retrofitting sensitively and minimising impact on 
heritage assets. To engage on implications of fabric improvements and 
energy reduction technologies on a cross -disciplinary basis.  By 2021 . Owner: 
Carbon Management / Planning Policy . 
6. Set ambitious carbon reduction planning policies for existing and new 
buildings in forthcoming Local Plan reviews  by 2022 . Owner: Carbon P a g e  | 22 
 Management / Planning Policy . Note: Subject to any changes to Building 
Regulations implemented at national level that may restrict local powers to set 
higher standards.   P a g e  | 23 
 Non-Domestic Building and Workplace Emissions  
Overall Objective: Achieve an EPC B on average in all in non -domestic buildings  
Similar to the domestic sector, carbon emis sions from businesses in Haringey are mostly 
related to the buildings they occupy.  Most of non-domestic  buildings are commercial 
buildings owned and managed by private landlords . Another challenge for the borough is 
that m ost of Haringey’s businesses are micro - and small businesses  meaning that these 
organisations often have limited resources to deliver action . Other non -domestic buildings 
included under this section include schools, healthcare, leisure and community buildings.  
The emissions  from non -domestic buildings are primarily those from heating and lighting 
buildings. These are responsible for just over 20% of the emissions in the borough.  
‘Process emissions’ from industry are the emissions associated with fuel and energy used by 
businesses for industrial and manufacturing processes (i.e. , the other energy they use that is 
not for heating and lighting the buildings they occupy). These are accounted for separately in 
the data and make up a small proportion of emissions in the borough, r eflecting the fact that 
Haringey does not have heavy industrial activity within the borough.   
The Council can directly influence businesses in properties which we own , by implementing 
energy efficiency measures . We can also work with the largest emitters in the borough 
(Alexandra Palace, Wood Green Mall, the Crown Court , and Tottenham Hotspur Stadium) to 
work together to mitigate their emissions.  
The actions focus on  refurbishing existing buildings , energy supply choices, and behavioural  
changes within the workforce and high standard new buildings.  
Workplace Actions  
 
Objective W1 – Target all businesses to increase prioritisation of carbon emission 
reduction in commercial decision making and facilitate a retrofit program by 2025 
(approx. 11,750 businesses).  
The majority of businesses in Haringey are micro -businesses, sometimes meaning that 
carbon reduction is not a priority. This action sets out to aid businesses to consider carbon 
reduction initiatives and the economic benefits of doing s o. 
• Action Owner: Carbon Management / Property / Economic Development  
• Cost: Capital cost of £100m to be funded and spent externally to deliver the 
necessary retrofits in privately -owned non -residential buildings at a rough average of 
£22,000 per property (a cross roughly 4 -5 different typologies). Additional funding 
may be required to cover the cost of technical studies and project development 
assistance.  
• Measurable metrics: Number and value of grants and/or loans awarded by the 
Council to businesses; Number  of engagements per year (new businesses, and 
repeat engagements) ; Average EPC score across all commercial properties in the 
borough (dependent on how the London Building Stock Model is developed and 
when it is launched) . 
• Potential carbon reduction : Medium  but significant wider impact to help businesses 
become more efficient and reduce running costs. Retrofit activities in small, medium 
and large enterprises in the borough could deliver up to 140GWh/year of savings by 
2050.  
• The detailed actions for Objectiv e W1 are listed below.  P a g e  | 24 
 1. Lobby government to require EPC B for all commercial properties by 2035.  
Deadline: 2021. Owner: Carbon Management . Note: To be required for any 
commercial properties that are let or sold.  
2. Embed carbon reduction requirements within al l Council engagement with 
businesses  by 2022 . Owner: Regeneration / Business engagement . 
3. Educate businesses and retailers in their role in addressing climate change. 
Develop guidance on integrating reduction of carbon emissions within 
commercial decision m aking.   From 2021 . Owner: Economic Development / 
Carbon Management  / Community . 
4. Identify external funding sources for non -domestic properties and manage 
distribution of funds by grouping similar retrofit intervention . From 2021 . 
Owner: Finance / Economic D evelopment . Note: Tie into community wealth 
building principles.  
Objective W2 – Engagement with ten of the borough’s largest emitters to enable and 
support large -scale projects and high -profile action.  
Working with the largest emitters in the borough can m ake a significant impact in a relatively 
short period of time, especially as these businesses are likely to have the financial capacity 
to implement change.  
• Action Owner : Carbon Management / Business es 
• Cost: <£5k and existing staff time to promote and enga ge with the big emitting 
businesses  
• Measurable metrics : How many businesses set targets to reduce emissions and 
improvement in EPC rating (every 5 years)  
• Potential carbon reduction : Significant with up to 65GWh/year that would be 
delivered by retrofit of a ll large enterprise premises.  
• The detailed actions for Objective W2 are listed below.  
1. Identify the largest ten carbon emitters within the borough, understand their 
priorities and business drivers.  Deadline 2021 . Owner: Carbon Management . 
Notes: Use results of Energy Savings Opportunity Scheme (ESOS) and EPC 
database to inform this work.  
2. Help largest emitters to understand the risks of increasing energy costs and 
to agree targets to reduce carbon emissions through behavioural changes 
and retrofitt ing their properties. Local business cases will have to be made 
with them.  Deadline: 2021 . Owner: Carbon Management / Economic 
Development . Note: To start this work during the engagement period in 2020.  
3. Encourage the businesses to commit to sustainable bus iness practices (such 
as signing up to renewable energy, choosing sustainable suppliers etc) . 
Deadline 2023 . Owner: Carbon Management / Economic Development . 
4. Deliver a local energy fund to e ncourage these companies to fund local 
carbon offsetting of their emissions on flights or carbon emissions. Deadline: 
2023 . Owner: Carbon Management / Stakeholders . 
Objective W3 – Engagement with public bodies to support energy efficiency 
improvements in h ealth & education public buildings across Haringey by 2034.  
Public buildings larger than 250 m2 are required to have a Display Energy Certificate (DEC). 
The DEC register provides a ready list of buildings to target. As a public body, the Council is 
well po sitioned to connect with other public sector organisations within the borough and 
encourage change.  
• Action owner: Social Care / Education / Energy and facility managers of public 
buildings if in -house  P a g e  | 25 
 • Cost: External £ 10-12m capital cost to be secured by pu blic bodies for retrofit of 
health and education -related buildings (high -level estimate). Government will be 
lobbied to commit to this cost.  
• Measurable metrics: Average operational rating (DEC) across all public buildings per 
year 
• Potential carbon reductio n: Full retrofit of the sector could reduce energy 
consumption by around 28GWh/year.  
• The detailed actions for Objective W3 are listed below.  
1. Lobby government (Department for Education, NHS) to ringfence funds to 
pay for creating a Zero Carbon Action Plan f or all schools (see Action C1) and 
fund delivery of energy efficiency measures in all health and education 
buildings to EPC B.  Deadline  2021. Owner: Carbon Management . Note: The 
funding could be in the form of a loan scheme (based on infrastructure pay -
back terms).  
2. Support public bodies to set targets to  apply for funding,  deliver energy 
efficiency improvements and provide technical guidance . Ongoing . Owner: 
Carbon Management  / Asset Management. Note: This should be integrated 
within t he wider maintenance and repairs programme for schools.  
3. Enable pooling of projects and resources to reduce the cost of retrofit 
activities  by 2034 . Owner: Carbon Management / Procurement . Note: 
Strategic Procurement will closely work with key stakeholders on a case -by-
case basis to explore these outcomes.  
Objective W4 – Reduce carbon emissions by bringing all existing council -owned 
commercial assets to an average of EPC B or better by 2035.  
The council has responsibility for a significant number of building s in the borough, either 
through ownership and/or operation and has a responsibility to lead by example.  
• Action Owner : Property and facilities management / Commercial lettings / Landlord 
and Tenant Functions (Commercial)  
• Cost: Programme delivery covered by  the existing Council property management 
teams. Business cases will be made on a case -by-case basis. The retrofit works 
need to be aligned with the maintenance and repair programme.  
• Measurable metrics : Average EPC score across all Council -owned commercial  
properties ; % of contracts of Council -owned commercial properties including a 
carbon reduction clause  
• Potential carbon reduction : Significant and reduced energy costs for the occupiers of 
council commercial units. Opportunity to increase rents for a bett er unit.  
• The detailed actions for Objective W4 are listed below.  
1. Require all Council operators to report energy consumption data year on 
year. Set energy reduction targets in operating contracts, such as for leisure 
centres.  Deadline 2022 . Owner: Property Services . Note: Targets can be set 
into new contracts or contracts up for renewal.  
2. Specify scope of works required to reduce energy consumption in all 
commercial council -owned buildings to EPC B by 2035 (approx. 1,200 units 
across around 640 assets).  Deadline: 2022 . Owner: Carbon Management / 
Property Services . Note: Discussions have already been occurring between 
Carbon Management and Property Services on specific properties.  
3. Group types of Council supply chain contracts and set out new carbo n 
reduction clauses. Deadline 2022. Owner: Procurement / Carbon 
Management  To set a contract value threshold  for this clause by type of 
contract.  
4. Deliver Action Plan to improve properties and future lease conditions within 
the Council’s commercial let port folio, mapping out future purchasing and P a g e  | 26 
 selling requirements.  Deadline 2025 . Owner: Property Services . Note: Using 
the Asset Management Plan to inform this process.   
Objective W5 – Achieving zero carbon in all new build non -residential developments  
It is expected that there will be a need for an increase of over 20% in the commercial and 
non-domestic floorspace in the borough by 2050 (GLA - London wide average).  This is a 
considerable opportunity to limit additional emissions from new developments.  
• Action Owner : Planning policy / Carbon Management / Development Management / 
Housing / Regeneration / Business es / Developers  
• Cost: No additional cost to the Council, some additional cost to developers.  
• Measurable metrics : Average % of carbon emissions sav ed on site in non -residential 
schemes permitted per year  
• Potential carbon reduction : This is medium to significant depending on the industry / 
non-domestic users’ profile. Reduced cost in operation and avoidance of future 
retrofit costs.  
• The detailed actio ns for Objective W5 are listed below.  
1. Lobby national government and GLA to improve fabric requirements in 
Building Regulations Part L beyond October 2019 proposals, before 2025.  
Deadline 2020 . Owner: Carbon Management . Note: To update existing SAP 
modellin g which does not accurately represent carbon emissions in 
developments.  
2. Deliver training for planning staff and proactively engage in the planning 
process to deliver policy requirements. Deadline 2021 . Owner: Carbon 
Management . 
3. Produce new planning guidanc e on overheating, green roofs and on -site 
carbon reduction measures, and update the Sustainable Design and 
Construction SPD.  Deadline 2021 . Owner: Carbon Management / Planning 
Policy . Note: Within remit of existing Carbon Management staff.  
4. Update the cost of carbon to a price that incentivises on -site reduction and 
review every 2 years.  Deadline 2020 . Owner: Carbon Management / Planning 
Policy . Note: First increase to £95/tCO 2 took effect on 1st January 2020. 
Further review underway following the publi cation of the Cost of Carbon 
Report by LETI (May 2020).  
5. Review existing Conservation Area boundaries and update conservation area 
appraisals and management plans that enable more carbon reduction 
measures to be installed  sensitively . Deadline 2021 . Owner: Carbon 
Management / Planning Policy . Note: Within the lobbying ask.  
6. Set ambitious carbon reduction planning policies in forthcoming Local Plan 
reviews.  Deadline 2022 . Owner: Carbon Management / Planning Policy . Note: 
Subject to any changes to Building Reg ulations implemented at national level 
that may restrict local powers to set higher standards.   
Objective W6 – Supporting local business reduce their wider carbon emissions  
The businesses of the borough can reduce their carbon footprint through using local  supply 
chains, promoting active travel for their staff, and choosing lower carbon products.  
• Action Owner - Carbon Management / Regeneration / Businesses .  
• Cost - Minor additional cost to the Council  but will align with existing regeneration 
programmes  and the High Streets Recovery Plan, through which funding can be 
secured.  
• Measurable metrics - Number of businesses engaged on carbon reduction projects .  P a g e  | 27 
 • Potential carbon reduction - This is minor,  but this depends on the businesses level 
of engagement. Reduced cost in operations and positive public relations for the 
businesses.  
• The detailed actions for Objective W6 are listed below.  
1. For the Council to signpost and advise businesses on their role i n carbon 
reduction. Promoting positive action through operations and supply chains. 
Enabling businesses to use local supply chains and increase community 
wealth building. By 2021. Action Owner Carbon Management / Regeneration. 
Note : This aligns with the wo rk around the long -term sustainability of the High 
Street. And promote Community Wealth Building.  
2. To encourage businesses to switch to green energy suppliers, from 2020.  
Owner : Businesses.  
3. Set up a cargo bike or e -cargo bike delivery service trial for loc al businesses.  
Deadline 2022. Owner: Carbon Management / Town Centres Team  
4. Increase education to encourage the adoption of a circular economy 
approach to their business model.  From 2022. Owner: Carbon Management / 
Town Centres Team / Employment & Socio -Economic Regeneration  
5. For businesses to promote their low carbon credentials, from 2020. Owner : 
Businesses. Note : Several businesses already doing this.  
6. Promote Active Travel to businesses , from 2020. Owner : Carbon 
Management / Regeneration.   
 
  P a g e  | 28 
 Transport  
Overall Objective:  Reduce emissions related to  road transport ation by 50% by 2025,  by 
growing public  and active travel options , low-carbon transport options and infrastructure  (e.g. 
EV charging stations)  
Transport is the third largest source of emissions in the borough and  is responsible for 
approximately 20% of the borough’s emissions. In London, 96% of the emissions come from 
private vehicles which are also associated with poor air quality , noise,  social isolation, and 
health issues w ithin the borough.  Whilst low carbon forms of motorised transport do exist, 
there are still air quality issues associated with these solutions (e.g. , tyre wear and braking). 
Furthermore, congestion issues are not solved by making every car electric. For th ese 
reasons, the Council prioritises adoption of public and  active transport modes.  
Cycle sharing, cycle infrastructure, parking restrictions, walkable streets, pedestrianisation 
and prohibition of vehicle use in some contexts can all help deliver a mode  shift for the 
borough. Research indicates strongly that the best way to stimulate an uptake in walking and 
cycling (and a reduction in car use) is through a complementary package which includes 
both hard  (new cycle lanes and bike storage)  and soft (cycle tr aining) measures. In 
Haringey, parking management and control schemes such as Controlled Parking Zones 
(CPZs) have helped to reduce the number of non -local cars (commuters and shoppers) in 
the borough. Across London similar schemes have helped to improve a ir pollution, access 
and accessibility and promote the local economy  (Source: ‘Benefits of Parking Management 
in London’ report by Integrated Transport Planning (August 2018)).  
It is acknowledged that dangerous driving exists on our roads, impacting people’s perception 
and experience of safety. These safety fears need to be overcome in tandem with improving 
people’s driving behaviour to unlock the necessary growth in active trave l.  
There are some limitations to addressing transport emissions. It is a complex issue due to 
the transience of journeys and the fact that journeys are not necessarily contained within the 
borough. Journeys may start and finish outside Haringey. In additi on, TfL has a high degree 
of control over public transport and key road networks, leaving the Council with more limited 
influence.  To manage these in a strategic manner will require the Council to work closely 
with TfL and our neighbouring boroughs.  
Many o f these actions are economically prudent (such as car clubs and active travel) for 
individuals. And TfL economic impact assessments for schemes like Mini -Holland have been 
shown to increase local economic activity for the benefit of the local businesses. T his 
creates  better neighbourhoods and are being practi sed elsewhere in the UK. But rarely all at 
the same time and in the same place. Furthermore,  to deliver these will require a significant 
change in our behaviours and use of private combustion vehicles.  
This does not mean that the borough cannot set itself ambitious targets  of shifting  to cleaner, 
greener mobility solutions.  Under the Climate Emergency Scenario, the number of journeys 
made by petrol and diesel vehicles need to decrease at a much faster r ate than the 2050 
Scenario: the number of petrol and diesel journeys need to  be halved by 2024, compared 
with 2032 under the 2050 Scenario.  The intention of this is to decrease emissions at a faster 
rate, as this will reduce carbon quicker and deliver a be tter highways environment for all. 
Improving connectivity across our communities and air quality . The Council has the power to 
reduce these emissions through its management of CPZs, the reallocation of road space, 
prices of parking permits and electric vehicle charging deployment . It is therefore technically  
easier to mitigate these emissions than in other sectors and actions, such as retrofitting 
homes.  
Figure 6: Chart showing transport -related emissions in 2015 and 2041. In 2015, 127,637,566 
ktCO 2 was emitted ; the ambition for 2041 is 3,808,360 ktCO 2. P a g e  | 29 
  
 
Transport Actions  
Objective T1 – Deliver a five -year sustained programme of engagement with Haringey 
residents to encourage mode shift towards public and active transport choices, with 
aim to achieve 88% of daily journeys to include walking, cycling and public transport 
by 2041.  
This will build on existing plans and targets in the Mayor of London’s Transport Strategy  and 
Haringey’s Transport Strategy . Timelines for interim review can be arrange d to coincide with 
the next key business and transport planning horizons.  
• Action owner: Transport Planning / Active Travel / Residents and Employers   
• Cost: Existing posts will deliver the capital programmes and scaling up which will be 
expected to deliver the Mayors Transport Strategy ambition. Schemes include School 
Streets, segregated cycle lanes, Liveable Neighbourhoods, and pavement widening. 
Funding will be secured through TfL and parking charges.  
• Measurable metrics: Number of active transport journey s per day ; % of total car 
ownership in the borough . 
• Potential carbon reduction: Significant as it will support air quality, noise, alongside 
health and wellbeing objectives. Combined with all other Transport objectives, a total 
of 120 ktCO2 by 2041.  
• The de tailed actions for Objective T1 are listed below.  
1. Engage with  residents to overcome barriers to enable switching to active and 
zero carbon transport , including behavioural change methods.  Deadline: 
2021. Owner: Active Travel.  Note: The Autumn 2020 engageme nt period 
formed the basis to designing the survey.  
2. Scale up personalised bike training and highways education for safe cycling , 
targeting groups less represented amongst cyclists (ages, locations, socio -
economic background, ethnicity, gender) .  Increasing from 1,500 residents a 
year to 2,000. Review effectiveness and opportunities to increase impact. 
(Ongoing). Owner: Active Travel/Cycle Confident (partner). Note: Post -
training evaluation is not currently undertaken.  
3. Engage with disability groups  and residents to understand the needs to make 
public spaces more accessible.  Deadline 2021. Owner: Active Travel / 
Transport Planning / Highways  
4. Roll out ‘Try Before  You Bike ’ schemes and expand to additional types of 
bikes.  Continue to promote the scheme  to residents and extend it to local 
businesses  (Ongoing ). Owner: Active Travel . Note: This scheme is being run 
by Peddle My Wheel since June 2019 and this is increasing in scale to add 
electric and (e -)cargo bike elements. First aimed at residents and the  plan is 
to be expanded to local businesses as well.  
5. Work with residents and businesses to design, implement and maintain 
parklets and Play Streets  (Ongoing ). Owner: Planning  / Transport Planning  / 
Highways . Note: There are approximately 50 Play Streets a year – aiming for 
80 a year. Need to lobby the Mayor for one major road closure a year.  
6. Lobby TfL to introduce more Zero Emission Bus routes to Haringey , increase 
east-to-west bus routes, smaller buses with shorter routes, model the road 
network with great er emphasis on public transport and active travel.  From 
2021. Owner: Transport Planning  / Highways . Note: Can enable this through 
local consultation.  
7. Plan future 5 -year active travel engagement programmes with lessons learnt 
from the first major programme , from 2026 . Owner: Transport Planning . P a g e  | 30 
 Objective T2 – Delivery of a 4 -year programme to improve active  and accessible  
transport infrastructure by 2025  
The aim is to transform the borough’s active transport infrastructure so that walking and 
cycling become the most obvious and efficient modes of transport for most people living and 
working in the borough, and well -integrated with public transport services for those making 
longer journeys. The programme should make use of the three redevelopment areas in the 
borough to establish new standards for active transport connectivity.  
• Action Owner : Planning  / Transport Planning  / Highways  
• Cost: Annual capital investment of £16m, £64m in total. Cost to be met by Council 
and/or external funding opportunities.  
• Measurable metrics : Km of total dedicated cycle routes delivered ; Number of 
additional secure and covered cycle parking spaces installed . 
• Potential carbon reduction : Medium. Combined with all other Transport objectives, a 
total of 120 ktCO2 by 2041.  
• The detai led actions for Objective T2 are listed below.  
1. Lobby TfL to help fund the delivery of 30 -60 km of dedicated cycle route 
infrastructure in the borough. Work with TfL to determine new strategic routes 
and the Council to connect to strategic routes with local  routes to create a 
joined -up cycle network. Deadline: 2021 , delivery by 2025 . Owner: Transport 
Planning . Note: Include  design standards such as clear signage and 20 mph 
zones.  To include major roads in Haringey.  
2. There will be a presumption in favour of re allocating public highway spaces 
currently allocated to private and business vehicles (e.g., car parks, roads, 
on-street parking) to prioritise active travel (wider pavements and cycle lanes) 
and green space. This would include the re -prioritisation of cro ssings in 
favour of pedestrians. To increase accessibility across our neighbourhoods 
for all.  From 2020 . Owner: Highways . Note: Deliver high quality , accessible 
public realm and pavement area s to encourage walking, supported by quiet 
ways and wayfinding.  Explore reducing on -street parking to one side of 
streets only.  
3. Scaling up  safe cycle storage across the borough , in residential streets, in 
shopping areas and at all transport interchange points, including provision for 
e-bikes . Deadline 2024.  Owner: Transport Planning  / Highways . Note: 
Installed based on local demand. Funded through LIP.  
4. Develop and implement a School Streets programme to improve air quality, 
increase active travel, improve road safety and create pedestrian - and cycle -
friendly  neighbourhoods around the borough’s primary schools. This will 
include detailed feasibility and design of the School Streets, working together 
with stakeholders to consider local access requirements. From : 2020. Owner: 
Active Travel  / Highways . Note: All primary schools  in the borough have been 
assessed for their feasibility, a School  Streets plan for the implementation of 
the first 20 School Streets was approved at Cabinet in November 2020 . 
5. Introduce a bike hire /sharing  scheme to the borough  including an e-bike 
scheme . Deadline: 2022. Owner: Transport Planning . Note: This is likely to be 
a dockless hires scheme. London Councils/TfL are coordinating a pan -
London byelaw that will enable the managing of dockless bike schemes.  
6. To explore, design and i mplement Zero Emission Zones  and Low Traffic 
Neighbourhood areas . Review and address concerns from the Liveable 
Neighbourhoods Crouch End project, with view to roll out.  By 2023. Owner: 
Transport Planning  / Highways . Note: Low Traffic Neighbourhoods are being 
propo sed in the Bruce Grove, St Ann’s and Bounds Green areas with further 
proposed in the draft Walking & Cycling Action Plan.  P a g e  | 31 
 7. Aim to reduce emissions from road and resurfacing works, for non -road 
mobile machines through stronger planning policy and enforcement . From 
2021. Owner: Carbon Management / Planning / Highways . Note: In line with 
London's 'Low Emission Zone' for Non -Road Mobile Machinery and policies to 
reduce idling of HGVs.  
8. Consult with road safety groups and other relevant organisations to ensure 
highway designs are safe.  From 2021. Owner: Transport Planning  / 
9. Highways  
Objective T3 – Develop policies and projects that disincentivise private household car 
use and reduce vehicle trips by businesses.  
This aligns with the  Mayor of London’s Trans port Strategy,  Haringey ’s Transport Strategy 
(2018) and the draft Haringey Parking Action Plan, which has aim to discourage private car 
use. This can be achieved through expanding CPZs both in operating hours and space; 
reallocating road space to prioritis e active and accessible travel infrastructure (T2); and 
raising parking charges.  
• Action Owner : Highways / Residents / Businesses / Wider stakeholders  
• Cost: Funding for studies and management of the consultation. Cost to be met by 
Council. However, in the long term, income generation and ring -fenced for 
sustainable transport initiatives.  
• Measurable metrics : Km2 covered in operational CPZs ; Average number of hours 
CPZs are operational per day . 
• Potential carbon reduction : Medium. Combined with all other T ransport objectives, a 
total of 120 ktCO2 by 2041.  
• The detailed actions for Objective T3 are listed below.  
1. Lobby the government to phase out combustion engines by 2030.  Deadline: 
2020 . Owner: Carbon Management . 
2. Investigate and deliver a borough -wide freigh t and last mile delivery strategy, 
focusing on hot spots in retail centres, with the aim to consolidate freight and 
delivery journeys.  Deadline: 2025 . Owner: Transport Planning and Wood 
Green Regeneration .  
3. Assess the vehicles in the borough through DVLA data to understand the 
vehicle make up in terms of emissions in the borough. This information will be 
used to determine price bandings for permit and on -street parking charges. 
Revise parking charging price bandings. Deadline: 2021. Owner: Highways . 
Note: Ensure that any income generated from parking charges is ring-fenced 
into sustainable transport projects.   
4. Whilst not currently viable , continue to review the delivery of a borough 
workplace parking levy to disincentivise employee car use and reduce i mpact 
of commuting by car, except disabled people. From 2020 . Owner: Highways 
and Carbon Management. Note: Any income generated from a workplace 
levy (if implemented) should support active travel  measures .  
5. To roll out a resident -led CPZ programme and revi ew existing CPZs to ensure 
that they continue to meet the demands of residents and businesses  to 
reduce car usage and manage visitors to the borough by car. While ensuring 
high user satisfaction, reducing fraud levels, and congestion peaks (e.g., 
around  events).  Deadline : 2023. Owner: Highways. Note: CPZs help 
discourage long -term parking and reduce fewer vehicle journeys into CPZ 
areas. Seek to extend CPZs both geographically and for longer periods of 
time (e.g. operating all day).The 2020/21 CPZ programme  is prioritising the 
review of CPZs that have not been reviewed for a few years, assessing 
whether CPZs are effective and whether changes can be made, particularly to 
the 2 -hour CPZs.  P a g e  | 32 
 6. Ensure that parking charging systems used across the borough (CPZ’s and 
P&D pays) reflect the needs of the community (residents and businesses) 
and wider environmental concerns – air quality, carbon, congestion and 
highways space . Deadline: 202 1. Owner: Highways.  Note: A diesel surcharge  
plan will be presented at Cabinet in Spring 2020. This surcharge will not only 
target air pollution  levels (reducing NO x and CO) but also tackle carbon 
emissions related to diesel usage, congestion and road safety.   
Objective T4 – Programme to incentivise  the move to low and zero emission vehicles 
by residents and businesses for people who are less able to rely on active and public 
transport infrastructure to move around  
This aligns with the Haringey Transport Strategy (2018) and draft Ultra -Low Emission 
Vehicle Action Plan.  
• Action Owner : Carbon Management/Highways  
• Cost: £50,000 over 3 years for education and awareness raising.  Supporting the 
switch through tracker app lications,  etc. 
• Measurable metrics : % of vehicles registered in the borough that are low and zero 
emission  
• Potential carbon reduction : Minor. Combined with all other Transport objectives, a 
total of 120 ktCO2 by 2041.  
• The detailed actions for Objective T4 are listed below.  
1. Promote EV -related regional and national grants and loan systems applicable 
to residents and businesses.  Deadline: 2021 . Owner: Carbon Management . 
Note: On the Council website, resident forums and business groups.  
2. Seek to overcome barriers to EV charging point infrastructure for residents 
without driveways.  From 2022. O wner: Transport Planning / Highways / 
Carbon Management  
3. Give permits to car club operators to deliver greater percentages of electric 
fleets and promote to residents, businesses, and new drivers , by 2025 . By 
2030 – have 100% electric car club fleets in the  borough.  Owner: Carbon 
Management . 
4. Establish a network for local businesses to join and access EV -related 
initiatives. This can include EV trials, e -cargo bike trials etc.  Deadline: 2021 . 
Owner: Carbon Management . Note: TfL support  and e -cargo bikes will form 
part of the ‘Try Before You Bike’ schemes . 
5. All planning applications should include EV charging points where applicable 
(100% active in Wood Green and the rest of the borough in line with the 
London Plan). All new homes should have access to charging point facilities  
within their area . Ongoing . Owner: Transport Planning / Planning . Note: 
Supported by Planning Advice Notes.  
Objective T5 – Expand provision and accessibility of EV charging infrastructure, with 
2,000 charging points by 2025  
This aligns with the Haringey Transport Strategy (2018) and draft Ultra -Low Emission 
Vehicle Action Plan. This will include private and public points. TfL predicts that the demand 
for EV charging will require approx. 2000 points in public and private parki ng areas.  
• Action Owner: Carbon Management/Highways  
• Cost: Approx. £25m private finance. Income generating and ring -fenced for 
sustainable transport initiatives  
• Measurable metrics : Number of EV charging points installed in the borough  
• Potential carbon reduction : Medium. But the switch to EV’s will deliver significant 
improvements in air quality, noise, and health and wellbeing objectives.  P a g e  | 33 
 • The detailed actions for Objective T5 are listed below.  
1. Continue to monitor EV demand across the borough and install  charging 
points in line with this. Ongoing. Owner: Carbon Management/Highways. 
Note: Use OLEV data to monitor number of EVs; use UKPN and TfL scenario 
analyses to determine how many EVCPs are needed. Use King’s College 
study to understand EV demand.  
2. Insta ll a variety of charging point types (e.g. , lamp column, standard and 
rapid) in suitable locations, with a variety of charging point providers. 
Ongoing. Owner: Carbon Management/Highways . Note: Work with partners 
such as UK Power Networks and TfL to implem ent charging points.  
3. Facilitate regional approaches supported by TfL to support a consistent 
approach to EV charging across London. Ongoing . Owner: Carbon 
Management . 
  P a g e  | 34 
 Energy  
Overall Objective:  Connect around 12,000 homes to low carbon heat source s and generate 
at least approximately 13 GW of renewable energy locally  
Introduction  
The carbon intensity of the national grid is falling, decarbonising the electricity supplied to 
homes and workplaces. The Council can further support this by developing and  supporting 
low carbon forms of electricity generation, such as solar and wind power. This can be 
explored alongside local battery and other energy storage facilities – at a residential or local 
area level. This local generation will decarbonise the boroug h’s energy , but it also 
strengthens Haringey’s energy security. Renewable energy generation can be small scale 
(e.g., homes with solar panels) or can be large scale (e.g. , large solar farms and wind 
turbines).  
In Haringey, heating traditionally relies on t he combustion of natural gas. The efficiency of 
heat creation can be improved through the electrification of heating using heat pumps (air, 
ground or water source) and adoption of low carbon decentralised energy networks (DENs).  
The graph below shows the gap between demand for heat and electricity in the borough and 
the local supply of heat and electricity through district energy networks, solar PV and solar 
thermal installations. This gap is projected to narrow, with demand going down in line with 
the lar ge-scale retrofit programme in homes and workplaces, and supply going up in line 
with the five DENs being delivered in the borough.  
Figure 7: The total supply and demand for heat and electricity between 2015 and 2041. 
There is a downwards trend in both to tal heat and total electricity demand, as a result of 
energy efficiency improvements made to homes and workplaces. Total decentralised heat 
and solar thermal supply, and total decentralised heat and solar photovoltaic electricity 
supply increases.  
The Coun cil has limited influence in this sector, due to a signification proportion of electricity 
being centrally generated. Decentralised energy is growing, with smaller pockets of locally 
generated energy being supplied to smaller areas of homes and businesses.  The National 
Grid predicts that decentralised energy will be more popular in the future, with residents 
being ‘prosumers’ (someone who both consumes and produces their own energy), with more 
peer-to-peer trading of energy of a local level.  
 
Energy Actions  
Objective E1 – Install renewable generation in our public spaces (e.g. , Lee Valley) and 
review for wind turbines and PV solar arrays  
This will contribute to the decarbonisation of the grid as well as engaging residents with 
renewable energy through installation of large -scale wind and/or solar power generation in 
the Lee Valley.  
• Action Owner : Carbon Management / Energy Managers / Stakeholders  
• Cost: Installation of one wind turbine at £2.7m . Queen Elizabeth II floating solar 
reservoir development in west London  cost £6m . Funding mechanism/route to be 
determined. Subject to feasibility studies an d financial modelling, this could offer the 
Council a revenue stream and could be facilitated through a community energy 
company or joint venture.  
• Measurable metrics : kWh of renewable electricity generated annually through solar 
array and/or wind turbines  P a g e  | 35 
 • Potential carbon reduction : Significant, and these actions can act as a beacon for 
wider actions. Two 1.5 MW wind turbines and 17 kWp of floating PV arrays would 
generate 21 MWh of renewable electricity a year, which totals 5.5% homes in the 
borough.  
• The d etailed actions for Objective E1 are listed below.  
1. Conduct a feasibility study to assess the viability of installing two 1.5 MW 
wind turbines in Lee Valley  (in terms of wind speeds and biodiversity impact) . 
Deadline: 2021 . Owner: Carbon Management / Stakeh olders . Note: Could 
undertake this with Thames Water and a potential wind turbine/solar array 
provider.  
2. Conduct a feasibility study to assess the viability of installing 17 kWp 
(160,000 m2) of floating PV array on Banbury Reservoir.  Deadline: 2021 . 
Owner: Carbon Management / Stakeholders . Note: Could undertake this with 
Thames Water and a potential wind turbine/solar array provider.  
3. Work with Thames Water which  owns and operate s reservoirs in the Lee 
Valley, to identify suitable locations for further renewa ble generation projects.  
Deadline: 2021 . Owner: Carbon Management . 
Objective E2 – Develop a programme to encourage the installation of 20,000 PV arrays 
by 2041  
This should target businesses, residents and landowners. Existing grass -roots action in the 
borough already making progress should be supported (e.g. , en10ergy). Leadership should 
be demonstrated by expanding the installation of PV arrays on Council properties.  
• Action Owner : Carbon Management / Stakeholders (residents and businesses)  
• Cost: £28 m total capital investment to 2041. Cost external to the Council.  
• Measurable metrics : kW capacity installed through schemes facilitated by the Council  
• Potential carbon reduction : Medium.  Emission savings will vary according to 
property electricity consumpti on and array size, but on average PV installation with 
generate around a third of household consumption.  Roof -mounted PV on 20,000 
homes will generate around 13 GWh/year. This will raise significant awareness.  
• The detailed actions for Objective E2 are lis ted below.  
1. Work with Planning to understand what kind of planning permission is 
required and/or whether it falls within permitted development rights for 
different types of buildings/generation capacity. Deadline: 2021. Owner: 
Carbon Management/Planning . 
2. Work with community energy groups and other relevant organisations/groups 
to establish viable financial and delivery models for individuals, businesses 
and community groups for energy projects.  Deadline 2021. Owner: Carbon 
Management  
3. Conduct feasibility asse ssment for all roofs across Haringey to determine 
solar generation capacity. This should also include a financial 
model/economic assessment to identify payback periods for residents and 
businesses for solar PV.  Deadline: 2022. Owner: Carbon Management . Not e: 
Feasibility assessment can be funded through London ’s Community Energy 
Fund.  London’s Solar Opportunity Map can also be used as basis.  
4. Support existing grass -roots action in the borough already making progress 
e.g., en10ergy through S106 funding  (Action Com2) . Work with stakeholder  
groups to determine which projects are funded.  Ongoing . Owner: Carbon 
Management . Note: Use S106 Carbon Offsetting funding to financially 
support community energy.  
5. Support local apprentice ships to carry out solar PV installation works.  From 
2021. Owner: Carbon Management / Employment & Socio -Economic 
Regeneration / Procurement  P a g e  | 36 
 6. Join and promote bulk purchasing schemes such as Solar Together London 
to achieve economies of scale and maxim ise impact.  Ongoing . Owner: 
Carbon Management . 
Objective E3 – Develop policies to support installation of Decentralised Energy 
Networks (DENs) and connect to zero or lower carbon heat sources  
Initially this will focus on three  neighbourhood level heat DENs in N orth Tottenham, 
Tottenham Hale and Wood Green as identified in the existing masterplan and the Council’s 
newly expanded DEN at Broadwater Farm estate. Low carbon waste heat generated by 
industrial processes (energy from waste, underground) should be captured and used to heat 
our homes.  
• Action Owner : Carbon Management / Regeneration / Housing  
• Cost: £30m in Capital programme over 15 years for all three schemes identified in 
the existing energy masterplan (North Tottenham, Tottenham Hale and Wood 
Green). Additional projects could also come forward which may increase the budget. 
The Council will need to fund/arrange suitable financing for the projects; the  Council 
is likely to invest in and own the infrastructure and procure or partner with another 
organisation for the design, build, operation and maintenance of the D EN but may 
look to also bring in a third party to fund/own some or all of the network.  
• Meas urable metrics : Number of homes connected to DENs  
• Potential carbon reduction: Significant. 8,000 tCO2 – because this action contributes 
to the removal of gas boilers from around 12,000 homes connected by 2035.  Almost 
90% of homes will be served by heat pum ps and/or low-carbon district heating  by 
2050 . 
• The detailed actions for Objective E3 are listed below.  
1. Develop and update guidance notes to clearly set out the Council’s approach 
to heat networks and promote  (Ongoing) . Owner: Carbon Management / 
Planning P olicy. Note: Setting out long -term vision and to include energy 
strategy and achieve planning requirements . Implement in partnership with 
Development Management (and Housing / Regeneration for Council -led 
development).  Ongoing. Owner: Development Managemen t / Housing / 
Regeneration . Note: To include standard design documents to future -proof 
buildings that intended to be connected to DENs (e.g. , to allow for future 
lower temperature systems).  
2. Delivery of Outline Business Cases for initial set -up of Wood Gree n and 
Tottenham Hale DENs . Deadline Summer 202 1. Owner: Carbon 
Management . Note: This will secure Council support for the proposed role in 
the projects (likely to include funding and owning the networks).  
3. Completion of commercialisation for set  up of Wood Green and Tottenham 
Hale DENs.  Deadline: End 2022 . Owner: Carbon Management . Note: To 
include design development and securing planning / consents, customer 
acquisition and procurement of contractors to del iver infrastructure leading to 
a final investment decision in the projects.  
4. Completion of construction of first phases of Tottenham Hale and Wood 
Green DENs.  Deadline: Summer 2024 . Owner: Carbon Management . Note: 
Construction of infrastructure to allow sup ply of heat and initial supply of heat.  
5. Monitor opportunities for new networks / growth of existing networks / 
interconnection of networks.  Ongoing . Owner: Carbon Management . Note: 
Undertaking necessary feasibility work, business case preparation, 
commerci alisation and delivery to secure additional opportunities including 
any beyond scope of currently identified masterplan.  P a g e  | 37 
 6. Lobby government to support policy around delivery of DENs.  Ongoing . 
Owner: Carbon Management . Note: Government is developing the marke t 
framework for DENs.  
Objective E4 – Develop a programme of technical advice to encourage the adoption of 
heat pumps to achieve an average installation rate of 2,300 homes per year. Approx. 
£6k per unit.  
This should target businesses, residents and landown ers, and can be folded into action H3.  
• Action Owner : Carbon Management / Stakeholders  
• Cost: £640m external capital investment required for the installation of heat pumps. 
Technical advice for heat pumps would be captured in the provision of advice for 
privately -owned residential and commercial properties.  
• Measurable metrics : Number of engagement activities per year (linked to H3) ; 
Number of home visits for tailored technical advice (linked to H3)  
• Potential energy reduction: 79 GWh of heat supplied by heat pumps by 2050. 10% of 
homes will be supplied from gas and electric by 2050. Nearly all homes will be 
served by heat pumps and low carbon district heating.  
• The detailed actions for Objective E4 are listed below.  
1. Deliver training sessions for businesses  in local supply chains to increase 
knowledge on renewable energy and installation , and the importance of 
improving fabric efficiencies . Deadline: 2021 . Owner: Carbon Management . 
Note: Needs retrofitting of homes before this can be deployed.   
2. Provide new planning guidance with separate infographics for residents and 
businesses on what type of renewable energy they can adopt, how, and 
associated costs.  Provide advice on improving the energy efficiency of the 
building and reducing draughts to support the eff iciency of heat pumps and 
prevent high running costs.  Deadline: 2021. Owner: Carbon Management / 
Planning Policy . Note: This will include guidance on other energy efficiency 
improvements that should be made to buildings to ensure that heat pumps 
work more efficiently (such as increasing insulation, air tightness and 
improving the ventilation). It will also link to the DEN planning guidance work.  
3. Explore the setting up of local pop -up advice centres to help residents and 
businesses with retrofitting and inst alling renewable energy technologies.  
2021 -2022. Owner: Carbon Management / Regeneration / Town Centres  
 
  P a g e  | 38 
 Community  
Overall objective: to actively liaise with and support stakeholder  organisations to reduce 
carbon emissions  and promote further reduction . 
Generating community support  
Over 90% of all borough emissions are not within direct control of the Council. Therefore, the  
support and delivery of action by wider borough stakeholders is vital to ensure deliver y of 
this Action Plan. This means that all residents need to feel ownershi p of this ambition and 
feel empowered to take action. Alongside the Council t he borough hosts multiple active 
environment - and climate -related stakeholder groups who have successfully delivered a 
range of projects ; we will all need to work together to deli ver a Zero Carbon Bor ough. The 
borough ’s previous project and Action Plan (‘Haringey 40:20’, which helped decrease 
emissions by 40 per cent by 2020, compared to a 2005 baseline) gave rise to  the Haringey 
Climate Forum . This group aims to deliver projects and review policies and projects in 
Haringey with regard to climate change. It Includ es representatives from local sustainability 
groups such as the Community Energy Lab, En10ergy, Friends of the Earth, and the 
Muswell Hill Sustainability Group.  
The Council’s role is to support these stakeholder groups both resource wise and financially. 
The Council has previously given community grants of £10,000 a year to deliver carbon 
reduction projects. In 2019, projects included: double -glazing for bu sinesses; installing 450 
LED light bulbs in 250 homes; providing training opportunities  with access to new careers ; 
and improving pedestrian routes for schools. More details on these are found within the 
Council’s  Annual Carbon Report. A key enabler to sca ling up this support is the develo pment 
of a Community Energy Fund, reflected in Action Com2  below . 
The wider stakeholders ’ active support will be vital to deliver the Haringey Climate Change 
Action Plan , with a focus on engag ing with groups not yet engaged with and those who are  
not involved in climate change action already.  This support may be secured through policy 
changes, meeting venues, publicity on projects and wider co -ordination. It may be through 
direct grants, but also may involve d eveloping and co -ordinati ng new funding streams such 
as Community Bonds which can raise awareness and increase funding for projects.  
The Council will need to work with local youth, community, faith and religious groups and 
local businesses to facilitate t he large -scale change required.  
Supporting a local green economy  
The latest Office of National Statistics assessment of the Green Economy in 2019 shows 
that the UK low carbon and renewable energy (LCRE) economy grew by 6.8% to £44.5 
billion in 2017, from £ 41.7 billion in 2016. With the LCRE sector now growing at around four 
times the rate of the rest of the UK’s underlying economy, this means that this sector in the 
UK economy is growing the fastest, and if harnessed and supported, can deliver benefit s 
within Haringey through new jobs and industry. With increased public support and demand 
for a more sustainable environment, the LCRE sector is expected to continue to grow ahead 
of other sectors of the UK economy.  
Green sector jobs provide services or goods th at benefit our environment and/or conserve or 
restore our precious natural resources. Such jobs could increase the efficiency of our 
resource consumption, limit greenhouse gas emissions, minimise waste and contamination, 
protect, restore and enhance ecosys tems, and contribute to climate change adaptation. 
Examples of green sector jobs may include renewable energy installers, energy auditors, 
retrofit assessors and project managers, retrofit builders, businesses that champion the 
circular economy,  electric v ehicle engineers,  natural and low -carbon material producers and 
distributers,  organic food producers, eco -designers, ecologists and conservationists.  P a g e  | 39 
 Alongside this, to deliver the national government ’s sustainability objectives, such as Air 
Quality and Ca rbon Reduction, there is increasing taxation to reduce and improve 
performance through regulation. Schemes such as the Ultra -Low Emissions Zone (ULEZ) 
and increasing environmental taxes on energy bills impact on businesses revenue and 
performance. Therefor e, being an efficient and environmentally aware business will increase 
profitability and stimulate business growth.  
Protecting our ecosystems and biodiversity  
A new objective , Com4 has been added to respond to feedback from the community. We 
depend heavily on t he health of our ecosystems and biodiversity , which provide us with 
essential services, resources, but also support our wellbeing, health and ability to adapt to 
the impacts of climate change. Our ecosystems and species  are also impacted by the  
climate emergency, so protecting our natural environment is as important as reducing our 
greenhouse gas emissions to fight against climate change. The Parks and Green Spaces 
Strategy will set out the detailed objectives and actions to protect and enhance our local 
ecosystems and biodiversity. Objective Com4 sets out some of the actions of the Parks and 
Green Spaces Strategy related to carbon reduction.  
This action also aligns with the Mayor’s objective for London to become the world’s first 
National Park C ity and London’s Environment Strategy.  
 
Community Actions  
Objective Com1 – To increase education and awareness raising across the borough 
to residents and businesses  
Raising awareness of the impacts of climate change, and steps to mitigate, can encourage 
residents and businesses to engage with the issue and to enable behavioural change.  
• Action Owner : Carbon Management / Residents / Businesses / Partners   
• Cost: <£5k costs in delivering the actions. 1 FTE member of staff to coordinate with 
the stakeholders across Actions Com1 and Com2.  
• Measurable metrics : Number of events supported per year  
• Potential energy reduction : Small, but needed to unlock wider savings . 
• The detailed actions for Objective Com1 are listed below.  
1. Use Council’s communications networks to in crease awareness around 
carbon reduction. From 2020, Quarterly. Owner: Comms / Carbon 
Management . 
2. Support the expansion of  a community -managed web page on carbon 
reduction.  Deadline: 2021. Owner: Residents and interest groups . Note: The 
webpage was delivered in 2020.  
3. Attend and support at least 10 events a year to promote carbon reduction and 
healthier lifestyles , from 2021, Annually . Owner: Carbon Management / 
Residents and partners . Note: Many of the events were held virtually since 
the launch of t he draft Action Plan, during the COVID -10 pandemic.  
4. Publish performance annually on projects and impact on carbon reduction , 
from 2021, annuall y. Owner: Carbon Management . Note: In the Council’s 
Constitution.  
5. Promote the Haringey Green Homes Programme across the Council and 
borough network , and help expand its remit and audience.  From 2020 , 
annually . Owner: Carbon Management / residents and partners . Note: The 
2020 Green Homes Programme could not take place onl ine, however, the 
Council did share the videos that the programme released (households gave 
a video tour of their retrofitted homes).  P a g e  | 40 
 6. Set up a programme of community meetings to deliver the action plan. 
Deadline 2021. Owner: Carbon Management / Community  
7. Review of the HCCAP to align with new legislation, policy, funding and 
technological advancements.  Deadline 2030. Owner: Carbon Management  
Objective Com2 - To empower and enable community -owned  projects that deliver 
carbon reduction  
This is with aim to give the right tools to local community groups to take ownership of carbon 
reduction initiatives. This objective includes actions around lobbying to unlock funding and 
resources for these community groups to deliver action.  
• Action Owner : Carbon Management / residents / businesses / borough partners  
• Cost: £300k over 5 years. Community Energy Grants can be developed to support 
through Planning Carbon Offsetting in the s106. As set out by other authorities.  
• Measurable metrics : Amount and value of Community Gr ants awarded  
• Potential carbon reduction : Small. But this enables  the residents and borough 
partners  to deliver the borough ambition together and increase awareness.  
• The detailed actions for Objective Com2 are listed below.  
1. Lobby the GLA to retain the Londo n Community Energy Fund for community 
energy projects. Deadline: 2020 . Owner: Carbon Management . 
2. Lobby the government to bring back tax incentives for energy groups to 
unlock local investment in community energy projects.  Deadline: 2020 . 
Owner: Carbon Mana gement . Note: Tax incentives such as Social Investment 
Tax Relief (SITR).  
3. For the Haringey Climate Change Forum to be supported by the Council.  
Frequency: Quarterly . Owner: All Services . Note: Meetings are booked by 
Carbon Management, services invited to a ttend.  
4. For Haringey Council to set up a Community Energy Fund and offer grants for 
the residents and partners  to undertake and develop carbon reduction 
projects  and run low -carbon project competitions . From 202 1 annual award . 
Owner: Carbon Management / Residents / Businesses . Note: Funded through 
s106 monies already collected. The Community Energy Fund will be launched 
in 2021 following the adoption of the Action Plan.  
5. Develop a local carbon offsetting fund for the businesses and comm unity to 
offset their emissions on flights or carbon emissions . 2022-2023 . Owner: 
Carbon Management / Residents / Businesses . Note: Create an account for 
businesses, staff, and community to support local carbon reduction projects.  
6. Promote switching to a lo wer carbon energy supplier for residents and 
businesses . Ongoing . Owner: Carbon Management / GLA . Note: London 
Power is set up by the GLA https://mylondonpower.com/ . 
7. To investigate the development of “Green Community Bonds” funded by the 
community to inves t in carbon reduction projects . Deadline: 2021 . Owner: 
Carbon Management / Residents / Businesses . 
Objective Com3 - To support the development of a skills programme, new job s and 
careers in the carbon reduction sector.  
The Council has mapped the number of  homes that need to be retrofitted and the measures 
that need to be implemented. On the back of this, the Council can determine how many jobs, 
and the type of skills needed to fulfil this. This will need to be supported by new training 
opportunities and co urses. This objective will support the Employment & Skills Recovery 
Action Plan . 
• Action Owner : Carbon Management / Economic Development  P a g e  | 41 
 • Cost: This would be dependent on government funding to deliver a new training 
programme within the borough. Upskilling our residents and growing the green 
economy.  
• Measurable metrics : Number of courses being taught in the borough that upskill 
people to reduce carbon emissions  
• Potential carbon reduction : Small, but significant economic opportunities, and 
awareness outcomes.    
• The detailed actions for Objective Com3 are listed below.  
1. Lobby national government to deliver an education programme for the new 
work force that will deliver retrofitting and new technologies.  Deadline: 2021. 
Owner: Carbon Management / Employment & Socio -Economic Regeneration . 
2. Explore the delivery of a ‘Green Hub’  to accommodate retrofit installers, 
provide training on a large scale for young people, re -training for people 
entering into the green sector, and training  for people who can specialise in 
retrofitting heritage buildings . Enabling Haringey to be at the front of the new 
green economy. Deadline: 2022. Owner: Carbon Management / Regeneration 
/ Employment & Socio -Economic Regeneration . Note: The “Green Sector” i s 
one of the most sustained growth sectors of the UK economy.  Work with the 
Selby Centre and other local organisations to deliver this.  
3. Advertise new training opportunities and future careers in the local carbon 
sector . Advertise council -owned deep retrofi t projects as training opportunities 
for local young people (paid work experience, or apprenticeships). From  
2021. Owner: Carbon Management / Employment & Socio -Economic 
Regeneration . Note: To be embedded into tenders and contractual 
arrangements.  
4. Develop a low -carbon volunteer network to promote retrofitting in public and 
private sector, with volunteers receiving training. From 2022. Owner: Carbon 
Management / Regeneration / Community   
 
Objective Com 4 - Deliver carbon reduction projects that support the pr otection and 
enhancement of the borough’s biodiversity and habitats  
This is to increase the council’s ability to mitigate and adapt to climate change and address 
the ecological emergency and mass extinctions of species we are seeing globally.  
• Action Owner : Parks and Leisure / Highways / Carbon Management / Planning  
• Cost: This would be dependent on government funding to deliver a new training 
programme within the borough, upskilling our residents, growing the green economy 
and develop community group r esources.  
• Measurable metrics: Number of trees planted/removed ; area of publicly accessible 
parks and green spaces (sqm)  
• Potential carbon reduction : Small, but significant environmental opportunities, health 
and wellbeing impacts and awareness outcomes.  
• The detailed actions for Objective Com4 are listed below.  P a g e  | 42 
 1. Increase the overall area of green spaces in new developments and through 
the delivery of pocket parks.  From 2023. Owner: Planning / Regeneration. 
Note: Management and maintenance of these new spaces to be taken up 
privately or by volunteer groups, where possible. The introduction of the 
London Plan’s Urban Greening Factor will enable this.  
2. Increase biodiversity and habitat types in the borough’s green and blue 
network by increasing wildlife -only areas , and supporting biodiversity -
supporting infrastructure. From 2021. Owner: Parks and Leisure / Planning / 
Flood and Water Management / Community. Note: The management and 
maintenance implications will need to be explored with the relevant teams 
and partner s. The introduction of the biodiversity net gain requirement in 
developments will enable this.  
3. Increase the level of ‘standard’ or ‘heavy standard’ tree planting across the 
borough in appropriate areas. Investigate the suitability of creating new 
woodland areas / arboretum. From 2021. Owner: Parks and Leisure / 
Highways / Homes for Haringey / Community. Note: The council is 
undertaking a huge tree planting exercise to plant 1,000 trees in 2021 across 
the borough. This takes a ‘right tree in the right place’  approach.  
4. Develop a means of estimating the potential carbon sequestration from trees 
in the borough. 2022 -2027. Owner: Parks and Leisure / Carbon Management. 
Note: To be undertaken as part of an iTree Eco survey, under the Tree & 
Woodland Plan.  
5. Increase opportunities for local food growing through community -led groups, 
schools, and new developments. From 2021. Owner: Planning / Community -
led groups / Schools / Allotment Groups. Note: This is to reduce transport 
emissions related to food production and sup ply. 
6. Reduce emissions of the borough’s parks and increasing renewable energy 
generation through its buildings, machinery, vehicles and service delivery. By 
2027. Owner: Parks and Leisure / Carbon Management / Transport Planning. 
Note: Machinery and vehicle s will be moving to electric, where possible. To 
explore local solar PV on parks buildings to charge vehicles and tools.  
7. Increasing the biodiversity of Homes for Haringey open spaces and road -side 
verges by reducing cutting regimes, identifying appropriate  areas to deliver 
this, and delivering a pilot project. From 2022. Owner: Parks and Leisure / 
Homes for Haringey / Highways. Note: Consider implications for maintenance 
(different kit, frequency, methods).  
8. Install appropriate signage for the public to be a ware and educated of the 
purposes of the above projects. From 2022. Owner: Parks and Leisure / 
Highways  
 
  P a g e  | 43 
 National and Regional Lobbying  
As recognised by the Government’s Climate Change Committee 6th progress report, m any of 
the actions within this plan,  and the decisions  we make, depend on having supporting 
infrastructure and systems in place. Local authorities have powers or influence over roughly 
a third of emissions in their local areas.   
Therefore, the  borough can only achieve the 2041 ambition with the help and support of the 
residents, businesses, partners and wider borough stakeholders, with close  working 
alongside regional and national government to support new powers and new financial 
mechanisms.    
Haringey’s carbon emissions are inherently linked to transport systems which are strategic 
beyond the borough boundary. Energy generation is governed at a national and regional 
level. Many  actions in this plan are therefore not possible to progress witho ut implementing 
transformative changes at a higher level to deal with the climate emergency that the country 
and world are facing.  This list has been developed with input from Arup, UKGBC, developers 
and retrofitting companies, alongside the Haringey resid ents, businesses, partners and wider 
stakeholders.   
As outlined in specific actions, the Council will actively be lobbying national government and  
the Mayor of London (and Transport for London, TfL) to change policy and legislation, and 
release funding to support local governments, households and businesses in reducing their 
carbon emissions drastically.  
To do this, the Council will write to these bodies and publicise these needs whenever it can 
through formal consultation and engagement, and ad -hoc opportu nities.  
National Lobbying Asks  
National requests will be directed primarily to the Department for Business, Energy  and 
Industrial Strategy (BEIS) and the Ministry of Housing, Communities & Local Government 
(MHCLG) : 
a) Enforce a minimum domestic and non -domestic EPC rating required at point of sale and 
let to EPC B by 2035 , increasing from the current EPC E  and increase f unding to enable 
homeowners to retrofit their properties to EPC B ; 
 
b) Cut VAT for owners , residents and business groups on retrofitting and renewables from 
20% to 5% ; 
 
c) Give stronger powers and funding to the local authority to enforce Minimum Energy 
Efficien cy Standards  on private sector landlords ; 
 
d) Require realistic and accessible carbon emission modelling software in new 
developments  that deliver improved fabric requirements in Building Regulations Part L 
and implement before  the Future Homes Standard is im plemented in  2025 ; 
 
e) Adopt higher energy reduction standards than currently proposed in the Future Homes 
Standard consultations for domestic, non -domestic existing and new build properties;  
 
f) Support energy efficiency measures to be installed in buildings in conservation areas  
through  the Nation al Planning Policy Framework ; 
 
g) Promote reuse of existing buildings in policy  before demolition  and provide clear 
planning guidance on designing for deconstruction  of new buildings to reduce embodied 
carbon ; P a g e  | 44 
  
h) Ring-fence funding from the Department for Education and NHS funds to retrofit all 
public buildings ( schools and NHS buildings ) to achieve EPC  B; 
 
i) Stop the sale of conventional vehicles (diesel and petrol) by 2030 ; 
 
j) Bring back tax incentives and remove tax burdens for Community Energy Companies to 
unlock local investment in community energy projects ; 
 
k) Develop a national education and skills deve lopment programme to develop a workforce 
that can deliver retrofitting and implement new technologies ; 
 
l) Remove solar PV installations from business rates;  
 
m) Improve subsidies and/or funding for renewable energy to enable residents and 
businesses to resume installing renewable energy technologies, there is a particular 
need to tackling the current lack of subsidies for domestic properties or small -scale 
installations;  and, 
 
n) Expand the Salix loan scheme for public sector retrofitting.  
 
Regional lobbyin g asks  to the Mayor of London/Greater London Authority and TfL: 
a) Coordinate provision of technical energy efficiency advice to private households across 
London ; 
 
b) TfL to introduce more and increase the rate of deployment of Zero Emission Bus es; 
 
c) TfL to model the road network  and future transport schemes,  with priority for  active 
travel and then  public transport ; 
 
d) TfL to fund the delivery of 30 -60 km of cycle route infrastructure in Haringey ; 
 
e) Revise TfL funding process, by removing the bidding process for boroughs . Earmark a 
set amount of funding to deliver active travel infrastructure per borough  over a longer 
time period  to enable large schemes to be forward planned and delivered ; 
 
f) TfL to support regional approaches to enable a consistent appr oach to EV charging 
across London ; 
 
g) Deliver a  regional education and skills development programme to develop a workforce 
that can deliver retrofitting and implement new technologies ; 
 
h) For all funding from the GLA for projects and programmes to deliver the Zero Carbon 
ambition ; 
 
i) Develop clearer policies around the delivery of district energy networks  and community 
energy ; and,  
 
j) Retain the London Community Energy Fund for community energy projects . 
  P a g e  | 45 
 Delivering the Ambition  
The Climate  Change  Action Plan is a mbitious and  sets out the level of commitment required 
from all partners in the borou gh – the Council , businesses , residents, the Mayor of London 
and the national government.  It cannot be delivered by one party alone.   
Financial  
This Action Plan will be funded by the public sector, the private sector, and private residents. 
Some of this funding has already been secured, and some funding will need to be secured 
from the Mayor of London and Government, and other third -party organisa tions.  
Recent Government funding announcements (in the 10 Point Plan and Energy White Paper 
in late 2020) should be taken up where possible.  
The Council will fund its own actions through its capital programmes and additional revenue, 
many of which are un derway. Some of the  Council ’s costings in this Action Plan have been 
developed as estimates and will be worked up in detail with the relevant service areas when 
the Action Plan is progressed to the delivery  stage . These are  estimate s on the amount of 
funding we will need to secure from the government  and third parties to deliver the Climate 
Change Action Plan in response to the Climate Emergency.  
Within the Council financial plan there are already several existing capital funding stre ams 
proposed that will support the delivery of this Action Plan for the Council to be zero carbon 
by 2027 and the borough by 2041 , including:  
- Decentralised Energy Networks  (£27m over the next 5 years) – which will create low 
carbon heat networks in the bo rough’s regeneration areas;  
- School Streets Funding  (£3m over the next 5 years) – which will improve public realm 
and deliver active travel options around our schools;  
- Active Travel Programme  (£1.68m for 2020/21) – to support residents, employees 
and partne rs to cycle and walk more through training and education alongside 
infrastructure measures;  
- Streetspace Plan to support active travel through walking and cycling (£5.1m);  
- Street lighting energy efficiency LED upgrade (£7m over the next 2 years);  
- Parks an d leisure facilities carbon reduction programme (£3m over the next 5 years);  
- SME workplace intensification (£9.8m over next 5 years) which is improve existing 
and deliver new low carbon workspace units;  
- Council assets and Civic Centre improvements (£23m over 5 years) to deliver 
improvement in these key civic building, which will include carbon reduction 
measures; and,  
- Council housing  energy efficiency programme  (£101m over the next 10 years) – 
which will improve the energy performance of the Council ’s hou sing stock.  
There is  also a proposed low-carbon funding  stream  to facilitate existing projects to go 
further to deliver increased carbon reduction.  This will target corporate commercial property 
projects, where increased revenue can be secured.  
Projects that currently do not have funding streams allocated, which are  proposed to be 
delivered in the medium to longer term , will be reviewed and business cases developed 
before funding can be agreed. To fully deliver the ambition in this Action Plan , all new capital 
funding streams will be reviewed starting from 2020. Thes e will highlight the carbon saving, 
and both revenue and capital implications will be considered. It will be expected that all new 
funding asks to the Council and public funding streams will deliver a positive carbon 
reduction element. Furthermore, in our lobbying of national and regional government, the 
Council will call for more funding to support local authorities, residents and businesses to 
achieve the borough ’s ambition.  P a g e  | 46 
 To deliver our ambition there needs to be significant and sustained action by a r ange of 
other stakeholders, such as private homeowners and small businesses in the borough, 
which is why the costs of this scenario fall predominantly outside the Council ’s control.  
Lobbying and partnership work by the Council to regional and national gov ernment will be 
essential in securing the action needed to deliver on climate emergency ambitions.  
Many of the private investment by residents, businesses and partners will be delivered over 
a longer time period, with most being delivered as new technolog y and routine 
improvements take place , such as building improvements (replacement windows or heating 
systems), or new transport choices are considered and brought. To enable this rate of 
change to increase, the Council will signpost these stakeholders to n ew funding, or enable 
them to make informed choices around payback periods  funded through savings that can be 
realised.   
 
Governance and Future Monitoring  
This Climate Change Action Plan will require  robust  governance to implement  and monitor  
actions across the Council’s service areas. An important aspect to the governance structure 
is to monitor progress and ensure relevant service areas take ownership of progress.  
All Council projects will need to demonstrate they meet the carbon reduction r equirements 
as set out in this Action Plan through key decisions and procurement requirements . This 
plan will require senior leadership support  at all levels.  
The Council will report on progress made on th is Climate  Change  Action Plan through the 
Annual Ca rbon Report  which has been published since 2008 . The report has previously 
focused on the 40:20 commitment and will be updated in 202 1 to reflect the ambitions set 
out in this new Climate Change Action Plan.  All relevant service areas of the Council will b e 
required to monitor progress through the metrics set out in the Action Plan. 
The Council will also continue to report on the Borough Plan, which includes the zero -carbon 
ambition.  
 
Timeframe for Action  
It is intended that the plan is a live document and will require updating as t echnology , skills,  
and knowledge moves forward . In some instances, the groundwork for the high impact 
programmes will be delivered in the next three to five years.  This will enable the borough to 
deliver significant carbon reduction once fully designed and funding is secured.    
This current Action Plan  is focusing on the known solutions and measures needed now. The 
immediate actions will focus on delivery over the next 7 -8 years.  In the next update of the 
Climate Change Action Plan the Council will  review performance and continue to deliver 
change betw een 2028 -2036. 
Timeframe for Action - Immediate Action  
In response to the climate emergency, projects that have funding in place and the Council 
will move to delivery immediately  include : 
• School Streets programme ; 
• Streetspace Plan;  
• Homes for Haringey ener gy retrofit programme ; 
• DEN masterplan – feasibility  and planning stages ; 
• Active Travel Projects and Healthy Streets ; and,  
• Delivery of a Community Energy Fund . P a g e  | 47 
 There are also projects that require individual action plans and policy changes to ensure that 
we deliver best value and meaningful outcomes, now and over the longer term. Over the 
short term the Council will design these with stakeholders and plan a route  map to support 
the borough ’s net Zero Carbon Ambition. These include:  
• Review of the Council’s Asset Management Plan to embed carbon reduction in all 
refurbishments and new buildings;  
• Deliver y of new Zero Carbon development planning policies and advice for of all new 
development s across the borough;  
• An Action Plan for the Council ’s Corporate Estate setting out how we will become 
Carbon Neutral by 202 7; and,  
• An Action Plan for the schools of the borough, so that they can also move towards 
Zero Carbon Buildi ngs.   
These actions will enable the Council to work towards becoming net zero carbon by 2027 
and strengthen Haringey as a leader.  
Timeframe for Action – Medium  to Long Term A ction  
Many actions cannot be delivered  by the Council. As one borough we need to  ensure that all 
representatives – residents, businesses, partners , and other stakeholders understand and 
agree with our  zero-carbon  ambition.   It will require difficult conversations as we move away 
from our current lifestyle to a low -carbon future . We will need to a ddress issues such as 
reducing private car ownership, increasing the rate of private home energy efficiency 
improvements, and growing new green jobs in the borough.   
Once the Action Plan  is agreed , the Council can educate, support, and use i ts powers under 
local government to enable wider action. But the borough will need significant contributions 
and ownership from our residents, businesses, and partners to achieve our borough ’s 
ambition. These projects include:  
• Reducing the level of privat e car ownership in the borough, and increasing safe and 
active travel options for residents;  
• Delivering high numbers of retrofits and improved energy standards in the borough ’s 
102,000 homes;  
• Delivering high numbers  of retrofits , and improved energy stan dards in the business 
building and units across the borough’s commercial portfolio;  
• Repurposing the highways space in the borough to prioritise walking and cycling;  
• Increase the amount of renewable technologies across the borough, including 
options in our parks and conservation areas;  
• Growing the local supply chain to deliver new low carbon jobs and skills; and  
• Delivering a wide range of communications and promotion s to all stakeholders to 
normalise low carbon lifestyles and measures, which  will increase significant carbon 
reduction.   P a g e  | 48 
 Glossary  
Annual Carbon Report  - the A nnua l Carbon Re port provides a transparent year on year 
account of progress made to reduce carbon emissions from the Council's operations and 
Haringey as a whole.  
Climate Emergency declaration  – admitting  that climate change exists and that the 
measures taken up to this point are not enough to limit the changes brought by it. The 
decision mandates the government to devise measures that try and stop human -induced 
climate change. The declaration can be made on national and local government level. The 
specific term ‘emergency’ is used to assign priority to the topic, and to generate a mind -set 
of urgency.  
CO 2 – carbon dioxide , a greenhouse gas (see below).  
DEN  – Decentralised Energy Network. A DEN is a system  of highly insulated pipes that 
move energy in the form of hot water or steam from where it is created, to where it is needed 
for use in space heating and hot water production. A DEN has the potential to provide 
energy in a more efficient (and lower carbon ), cost competitive, and locally secure and 
environmentally beneficial manner, over conventional energy supply.  
EV – Electric Vehicles.  
EPC – Energy Performance Certificate. A requirement under The Energy Performance of 
Buildings (Certificates and Inspecti ons) (England and Wales) Regulations 2007  for 
properties to have a valid EPC (valid for 10 years) when the property is rented or sold. The 
EPC provides an indicative rating for the energy efficiency of the property (rating A to E, with 
E being the worst) a nd an indicative rating for retrofit improvements that could be made.  
GHG  – greenhouse gas. These gases contribute to climate change directly through their 
greenhouse effect by trapping heat in the atmosphere. Seven GHGs are listed under the 
Kyoto Protoco l which have different impacts on global warming; carbon dioxide (CO 2), 
methane (CH 4), nitrous oxide (N 2O) are naturally occurring GHGs, and hydrofluorocarbons 
(HFCs), perfluorocarbons (PFCs), sulphur hexafluoride (SF 6) and nitrogen trifluoride (NF 3) 
are h uman -made GHGs.  
GLA  – Greater London Authority  (comprising the Mayor of London and London Assembly).  
Green energy  – additional, certified power generated by renewable sources (by the 
Government definition of renewable).  
IPBE S - Intergovernmental Science -Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem 
Services , who published a Global Assessment report in 2019 . 
IPCC  – Intergovernmental Panel on  Climate Change , who published a special report in 2018  
on the impacts of global warming of 1.5 degrees Celsius.  
Haringey 40:20  - Haringey 40:20 was inspired by the passi on of local residents who 
convinced Haringey Council to join the Friends of the Earth 'Get Serious about CO 2' initiative 
and adopt an ambitious target to reduce CO 2 emissions in the borough by 40% by 2020.  
Haringey 40:20 brings together residents, business es, social enterprises, charities and 
community groups across Haringey to help to create a better future for everyone living and 
working in the borough.  
Liveable Neighbourhoods  – A funding programme initiated by Transport for London  for 
long-term schemes that encourage walking, cycling and the use of public transport. Liveable 
Crouch End  is the first of such schemes in Haringey.  P a g e  | 49 
 PV – photovoltaics, also known as solar panels. PV is a technology that converts sunlight 
into electricity through its solar photovoltaic cells.  
Retrofitting  – modifications to existing buildings to improve its energy efficiency and/or 
decrease energy demand . 
ULEZ  – Ultra Low Emission Zone. Vehicles need to pay a charge if they do not meet the 
ULEZ emissions standards.  
Zero Carbon  – A very energy efficient building or area which may have  on-site renewable 
power generation. This will reduce carbon emissions to a minimum.  Where emissions do 
occur, emissions can be offset through mechanisms which could include buying green power 
for the remaining energy demands. Developing a Power Purchase Agreement (PPA), PPA 
for out -of-borough renewable energy sources, and / or planting of trees each year to offset 
emissions (these would need to be certified independently and benefits quantified), etc.  
 