1
Newham’s Climate Emergency Annual Report 2020-2021
WE ARE
ACTION.
NEWHAM’S CLIMATE EMERGENCY ANNUAL REPORT 2020-2021
We are taking action in response to the climate emergency, to meet our carbon neutral targets by 2030;  
and get to carbon zero by 2050.
WE ARE
NEWHAM.2MAYOR’S FOREWORD  3
 
TOP ACHIEVEMENTS IN 2020 – 2021  4
 
INTRODUCTION  5
 
CLIMATE AND IMPROVING HEALTH AND WELL BEING  7
 
A GREEN ECONOMIC FUTURE  11
SUSTAINABLE ECONOMICS  12
 PROCUREMENT, ESTATE MANAGEMENT, AND PENSIONS   13
 
GREEN HOMES FOR THE FUTURE  15
 
AN ENVIRONMENT FOR ALL  16
GREENING THE BOROUGH  17
REDUCING WASTE AND INCREASING RECYCLING  18
 
IMPROVING OUR AIR QUALITY AND SUSTAINABLE TRANSPORT  19
INVOLVING AND EMPOWERING OUR COMMUNITY  22
 
NEXT STEPS  24CONTENTS
Visit www.newham.gov.uk to find out more information.3
Newham’s Climate Emergency Annual Report 2020-2021Addressing the 
climate emergency, 
and the implications 
for local residents 
here in Newham, 
is one of the most 
important areas 
of work that that 
we have been 
responding to at 
the Council since I 
became Mayor 
back in May 2018. 
This annual report 
highlights how we 
are progressing 
with ensuring the health and wellbeing of our residents, 
alongside the future of our planet, remains our focus, as we 
deal with the greatest existential threat we have ever faced 
as humanity. The Climate Emergency is compounding rising 
inequalities globally, causing social and economic dislocation 
and is responsible for the most significant public health 
crisis in over a century, with the Covid-19 pandemic which 
has disrupted our lives irrevocably since 2020.  
Over the decades, scientists and environmental activists 
have been drawing the world’s attention to the many harms 
caused by environmental degradation, including the rapid 
destruction of tropical forests. One of these harms is the 
emergence of new diseases that are transmitted between 
wild animals and humans, such as SARS-CoV-2 virus, which 
has now infected now more than 170 million people 
worldwide and resulted in more than 3.5 million deaths1.  It is 
clear that decades of indifference about the environmental 
and public health hazard this presents us, has in part led to 
the economic havoc and historic levels of unemployment 
around the world that we are now faced with. 
As we continue to deal with the Covid-19 crisis we 
appreciate more than ever the need to guarantee a healthy, 
safe and sustainable future. In November, the UK will be 
hosting the United Nations Climate Conference (COP26) in 
Glasgow, and this Climate Emergency Annual Report is our 
update on action we are undertaking in Newham as our 
contribution to the health and wellbeing of our residents, 
and preventing a devastating outcome for our planet. 
Responding to the dual crisis of climate and health, we are 
acutely aware of how the Covid-19 pandemic has brought 
inequality into sharp focus here in Newham, particularly for 
those on low incomes, members from our minority ethnic 
communities and those already struggling with poor health. 
That is why, we developed our Towards a Better Newham 
strategy and action plan, to tackle these inequalities, root 
and branch - ensuring that our response to the climate and 
health emergencies are central to this.Our ambitious approach – from building the homes we 
need to develop the skilled, green jobs for the future – is 
fundamental to reducing our emissions and meeting our 
climate neutral and climate zero goals. Our bold policies 
mean innovative measures to improve peoples’ health and 
pockets through the ways we live, work and enjoy our local 
areas. They mean increasing our ambitions and supporting 
our young people through a green economic revolution.
The Covid-19 epidemic has underlined the need to 
fundamentally change how we live, how we structure our 
economy but also how we exist in relationship to the world 
around us. The expansion of cities and urban environments, 
and the destruction of vital ecological habitats, have been 
eroding the natural barriers that can prevent diseases 
spreading - leading to catastrophic consequences as 
Covid-19 has shown.  Unless we stop environmental 
degradation, and get serious with our carbon reduction 
requirements, future viruses are highly likely to emerge.
Responding to Covid-19 has been a huge challenge for all 
of us in Newham and rightly, at the Council we have been 
focusing our resources to protect and support residents 
during this most difficult time. We have also pushed forward 
and delivered on many of our climate emergency actions 
we set ourselves for the past year putting sustainability at 
the core of our recovery strategy. From increasing air quality 
monitoring across the borough, introducing an emissions 
based parking scheme, to decarbonising all our Council 
buildings  switching all our street lights to 100 percent 
renewable electricity, planting more trees, and transitioning 
our vehicle fleet to fully electric, we are making progress. 
Our approach to climate emergency is becoming ever more 
visible in Newham, and its impact will be felt for generations 
to come. 
As we countdown to the COP26 conference later this year, 
which will be an accelerated call for greater international 
commitment and action, we’ll be calling for greater 
resources from national government to maximise our 
efforts in Newham. We also want to highlight what we are 
doing locally because we are ambitious and our agenda 
in Newham could contribute significantly to the actions 
the UK needs to demonstrate in response to the global 
response to the climate emergency. Despite limited 
support, and the unprecedented challenges of the Covid-19 
pandemic, Newham is confidently moving towards a 
healthier, fairer, and sustainable future for all our residents, 
and our Climate Emergency response is an important 
contribution to that.  
Mayor Rokhsana Fiaz OBE 
MAYOR’S FOREWORD
1  Source, WHO: https://covid19.who.int/ the figure is likely to have increased significantly since publishing this report.Newham’s Climate Emergency Annual Report 2020-20214
TOP ACHIEVEMENTS IN 2020–2021
1. STREETS
Rolling out five People 
Friendly Streetss and 
healthy school streets 
along with other measures, 
such as South Leytonstone 
and Forest Gate North 
People Friendly Streets 
in collaboration with the 
London Borough of Waltham 
Forest which is the first 
cross-borough initiative in the 
Capital, to reduce emissions 
in Newham and protect 
the health of our residents. 
A further two are being 
introduced in the  
2021–22 municipal year
 
2. 50 STEPS  
Sustainable living tied to 
our ‘50 Steps to a Healthier 
Newham’ Health and 
Wellbeing strategy 
3. FUNDS  
 Significantly decarbonising 
the Council’s Pensions Fund, 
with another £200m of assets 
moved to more socially 
responsible funds, meaning 
that by over 99.5 per cent of 
the Fund will be decarbonised
4. BUILDINGS
 Decarbonising our Council 
buildings following the 
successfully bid for a £2.7m 
grant through the Public 
Sector Decarbonisation 
Scheme 
5.  LIGHTING
Switching to 100 per cent 
renewable electricity for all 
Council operated buildings,  
as well as all street lighting in
the borough and communal 
lighting across all Council 
owned housing estates. Positioning Newham as one 
of London’s leading borough’s 
with the most extensive 
air quality monitoring 
networks to track progress 
on air quality  improvements, 
alongside being part of 
the Idling Action London 
campaign aimed at stopping 
motorists from needlessly 
causing air pollution
6. GREEN HOMES 
 Accelerating the ‘Passivhaus’ 
standards in the Council’s 
housebuilding programme 
so that all homes built are 
sustainable and green 
 
7. HEATING
 Embarking on the most 
significant Council home 
retrofit programme in a 
generation, including with 
cleaner, cheaper heating 
systems for all
8. SUMMIT
 Involving young people in 
our response to the climate 
emergency, including 
organising a Youth Summit  
on the topic
9. CHAMPIONS
 Expanding our network of Air 
Quality Health Champions to 
advocate our clean air agenda 
across the boroughNewham has achieved a significant amount over the past 12-months. Despite the unprecedented challenges of the pandemic 
we have made huge steps forward this year for this agenda. We are particular proud of the following achievements:
Well Newham 
50 Steps to a Healthier Borough
Health and Wellbeing Strategy 
2020-2023WE ARE MAKING 
HEALTHY STREETS.
WE ARE
NEWHAM.
A Healthy School Street 
for Hartley Primary School
Healthy School Streets aim to make it  
healthier and safer for children to walk,  
cycle or scoot to school and to create  
more space for social distancing.
From Monday, January 18th, 2021, Hartley Avenue,  
Winter Avenue, Campbell Road and Wakefield Street  
(between Winter Avenue and Aintree Avenue) will  
become a pedestrian and cycle only zone at school  
drop-off and pick-up times. Jovia, 6Z Godwin 
Junior School
HSS_Hartley Primary Schoo_RESIDENTS.indd   1HSS_Hartley Primary Schoo_RESIDENTS.indd   1 16/12/2020   16:3316/12/2020   16:33NEWHAM
A HEALTHY SCHOOL STREET  
KAYE ROWE NURSERY SCHOOL5
Newham’s Climate Emergency Annual Report 2020-2021TACKLING THE CLIMATE 
EMERGENCY 
Newham’s Annual Climate Emergency Report 2020-21 provides 
an update on the progress of our Climate Emergency Action 
Plan which was published in July 2020, following the Climate 
Emergency declaration made at Full Council in April 2019. 
It provides the next steps towards achieving our ambitious 
carbon neutral and carbon zero goals. This report also 
highlights key updates from the Air Quality Action Plan, which 
can be found in full at the Newham Council website.
Delivering these ambitious plans during the Covid-19 pandemic 
has undoubtedly been a significant challenge. Rightly, the 
response to Covid has involved mobilising the whole Council, 
with resources refocused to support and protect residents. 
Despite these additional challenges, we have made significant 
progress in tackling the climate emergency, with bold 
initiatives and plans put in place. 
Importantly, the pandemic highlighted more than ever the 
need to put health and well-being at the heart of everything 
we do. Climate justice, and building a sustainable future, is 
therefore at the front and centre of our Towards a Better 
Newham recovery strategy. Our plans to respond to climate 
emergency are integrated into the most important building 
blocks of the council’s strategic approach. 
BACKGROUND
In April 2019, Newham declared a climate emergency, 
committed us to achieving carbon neutrality by 2030 and net 
zero greenhouse gas emissions by 20502.  These ambitious, 
but necessary, targets are our contribution to meeting the 
non-negotiable needs of our planet. The Government has 
subsequently raised an additional target to reduce emissions 
by 78 per cent by 20353. 
In July 2020, our Climate Emergency Action Plan set out the 
key steps we will take to achieve these goals. The Climate 
Emergency Annual Report is an extensive report of our actions 
so far, and with further steps identified. 
In developing our policies, we worked with residents through 
our first Citizens’ Assembly on Climate Change during February 
2020, which addressed how the council and residents could 
work together to achieve the 2050 carbon zero goal. Many 
positive ideas came forward, incorporated into our action 
plan, and this year we reported back to participants on our 
progress. In addition, the Council’s Air Quality Action Plan, 
focuses on reducing localised pollution from transport and 
buildings.INTRODUCTION
2   A reduction in greenhouse gases by at least 100 per cent of 1990 levels
3   Compared with 1990 levels: https:/ /www.gov.uk/government/news/uk-enshrines-new-target-in-law-to-slash-emissions-by-78-by-2035
6
WHERE WE ARE:
The trajectory we are on is encouraging. The Council’s 
total emissions for 2019/20 were 7,125 tonnes of C02, a 42% 
reduction within the timeframe of this administration 
(since 2017/18); and some 58 per cent since data collection 
commenced in 2014/15. The table below illustrates annual 
emissions for the Council as an organisation. 
Year Carbon Emissions (tonnes of CO2)
2014/2015 16,847
2015/2016 14,969
2016/2017 14,164
2017/2018 12,329
2018/2019 9,216
2019/2020 7,125These emissions relate to buildings the Council is directly 
responsible for. In addition, the graph below illustrates the 
emissions within the borough and by sector. As can be seen, 
there has been a significant decline over the previous years, 
though this is due to a range of factors including Council 
actions and national Government policy decisions. This graph 
illustrates emissions (in thousands of tonnes) for the whole 
borough, excluding City Airport. 
City Airport itself does not come under government 
measurements of our emissions. However we acknowledge 
that passing the buck is not an option to avoid a climate 
breakdown. We have appointed an airport air quality 
monitoring officer, and we will work hard to ensuring emissions 
from City Airport are reduced as well as to improve air quality 
for our residents.
There is an encouraging decline in borough emissions, which 
shows we are going in the right direction. However, this trend 
alone is not sufficient enough to guarantee that we will meet 
our C02 targets. To achieve these goals, we need to continue 
being ambitious in our plans, but we can’t do it alone. We 
need to work with residents with this shared goal, and we 
need to push central government to do more to support this 
transition.INTRODUCTION
4  Source: BEIS LA CO2, 2019Newham’s CO2 emissions 2005 – 201747
Newham’s Climate Emergency Annual Report 2020-2021At our Full Council meeting in March 2021, leading health 
inequalities academic, Professor Sir Michael Marmot, spoke 
powerfully about the links between health, environment and 
poverty, and how predictably the pandemic revealed them. 
We are acutely aware of the disproportionate effects of 
Covid on ethnic minority communities, and how this deepens 
inequality. Compounded by ten years of austerity and cuts 
to local government funding, health outcomes and living 
standards have worsened for many people in the UK, and here 
in Newham. While Covid-19 has disproportionately hit our 
residents, climate change is also a factor. In particular, the high 
levels of emissions from cars which significantly contributes to 
poor air quality in the borough and impacts life expectancy. 
Asthma hospital admissions in Newham for children under 
19 in 2019/20 were 196.6 per 100,000 compared to 158.3 in 
England.  
We will continue to implement our plans and work with 
residents to improve health outcomes and tackle health 
inequalities linked to climate change. More broadly this links 
to other actions within this strategy, including tackling poor air 
quality, addressing fuel poverty and ensuring our residents live 
in quality homes which all impact health and well-being. 
ACTION OVER THE LAST YEAR:
There are clear links between poor air quality, respiratory 
health, and other long-term ill health conditions. This is an 
issue which disproportionately impacts Newham residents 
due to the high levels of air pollution in the borough. As part 
of tackling this we have massively stepped up our efforts to 
reduce pollution and cut harmful toxic emissions (see the 
section on air quality). We have increased communications 
with our residents to help better inform them and encourage 
healthier ways of living. This goes hand in hand with steps 
towards helping residents improve their personal health and 
puts people at the heart of our approach.
50 steps to a healthier Newham
Along with our partners, we launched 50 Steps to a Healthier 
Newham strategy to improve health and wellbeing of all 
residents in Newham. This has a specific focus on addressing 
all those social determinants of poor health outcomes, such as 
bad quality housing and poverty. This sets out how, by working 
together, we can make a real difference to our residents and 
is an integral part of the Towards a Better Newham strategy 
and has informed its Pillar 1 mission, where the measure of 
economic success is the health, wellbeing and happiness of our 
residents in Newham. An important feature of the 50 Steps to 
a Healthier strategy is our response to the climate emergency. 
Through this strategy we aim to improve air quality, tackle fuel 
poverty, encourage the use of green spaces to support the 
physical, emotional and mental wellbeing of local residents, 
and promote healthier lifestyles. Air Quality Health Champions
We have been working in collaboration with residents, 
businesses and partners in communities, schools, and health 
providers to recruit, expand and support a network of 
Air Quality Health Champions across the borough. These 
Champions help deliver key messages across to the wider 
community to raise awareness, initiate behaviour change and 
deepen the required changes to stop the damaging health 
impact of idling cars; as well as encourage the healthy option 
of walking and cycling to school. These latter actions also 
contribute to the reduction of childhood obesity.
TACKLING FOOD INSECURITY AND 
ENCOURAGING FOOD HABITS 
THAT ARE GOOD FOR PEOPLE’S 
HEALTH AND THE PLANET
Food production and processing is a major driver of climate 
change. Meat-heavy diets produce almost twice as much CO2 
as a diet based primarily on plant-based food. As a society, we 
cannot tackle the climate emergency without making food 
more sustainable and encouraging people to adjust how they 
eat. Wasted food contributes 8–10 per cent of total human-
driven greenhouse gas emissions, and roughly one third of 
food produced around the world is lost or wasted. Food 
insecurity is also a pressing issue, exacerbated during the Covid 
pandemic, due to lost jobs and incomes. Our plan for more 
sustainable food goes hand in hand with our efforts to tackle 
food insecurity.
Our upcoming Food Security Strategy will provide a robust 
response to support all families in Newham. Our approach 
builds on the work we have already done to tackle food 
insecurity. Last year we worked with local people to 
encourage them to eat more plant-based and less high carbon 
food, particularly meat. We will continue promoting the 
consumption of fresh, seasonal, and local produce, to help 
reduce ‘food miles’ and food waste. This is deeply linked 
to the food security approach is supporting our residents 
through education with preparation and cooking healthy 
meals. Through our approach we are linking efforts to tackle 
childhood obesity with our climate emergency response.CLIMATE AND IMPROVING 
HEALTH AND WELL BEING
8Food waste campaign 
Our #NewhamSavesFood campaign helps residents reduce 
food waste, providing regular online food waste reduction 
workshops, and four week-long cooking courses run by Well 
Newham Kitchen. We hosted 30 residents per course, providing 
recipes tailored to reduce food waste, with a significant impact 
on habits. Before the first course, all participants were wasting 
food once a week or more. After the course; only 10 per cent 
were wasting food once per week or more because it was out 
of date, only 15 per cent were wasting leftovers once per week 
or more, and only 30 per cent were wasting edible parts of 
food once a week or more.
Good food plan
The launch of Dockside Diner in Feb 2020 demonstrated how 
we could take a public sector site and transform it to deliver 
food for people and planet. By focusing on fresh produce with 
lower carbon emissions, this initiative provides good quality 
healthy food that benefits both people and the environment. 
This is an exemplar of good practice which we hope will be 
replicated across both the public and private sectors.
Eat for free in Primary Schools 
Mayor Fiaz has guaranteed the continuation of the Newham 
Eat for Free programme - which provides the universal Free 
School Meals to all nursery and primary school children 
regardless of background. Integrated into our approach is the 
Healthy Schools Programme, a whole schools healthy approach 
where the Council supports schools improve public health. 
The Council is proud to be working collaboratively with all the 
66 primary schools in the borough and the programme will 
integrate the principals of reducing food waste. WHAT WE HAVE ACHIEVED IN THE LAST YEAR:
17
Half the rubbish thrown in the bin by Newham 
residents is uneaten food. This is made up from 
items like leftovers or food that has gone off 
before it could be eaten. In effect it means they 
are throwing away hundreds of pounds every year.
Getting rid of wasted food also costs Newham 
Council and there is an environmental impact of 
dealing with wasted food. There is an additional cost 
to the planet because food production, packaging and 
transportation, all produce carbon emissions which 
contribute to climate change.
Analysis by the Council reveals that half of what goes 
into Newham’s bins is wasted food and more than half 
of this could have been avoided. If residents waiste 
less food, it will cut both their costs and the Council’s, 
allowing it to spend money on other services.
A group of residents took part in a four-week trial, 
measuring how much food they threw away and 
estimating its cost. The figures revealed they were 
throwing away on average 3kg of food every week, at 
a cost of £7.23 per household. One person threw away 
more than 5kg. Many said the trial had helped them 
realise just how much food they were wasting while 
others became aware that their food was going straight 
from their fridge or cupboard to the bin.
 Reducing waste is a key target for the Council’s 
waste and recycling team. The team gave residents 
tips on throwing away less food with the result that by 
the end of the trial people were wasting 30 per cent 
less. One of the tips that most helped people save 
money was making sure they knew what they needed 
to buy before they went shopping, either by making a 
list or taking a picture of what they already had in their 
cupboards or fridges so they didn’t double buy.
Love Food Hate Waste, a campaign that raises 
awareness of the need to reduce waste, estimates 
an average family of four could save £720 every year 
by cutting the amount of food they waste. For tips 
visit www.lovefoodhatewaste.com/why-save-
food and also look for food waste reduction tips from 
Newham’s Ecobot on social media. Be sure to follow 
the #NewhamEcobot tag. 
What you said:ECOBOT  JOINS THE CAMPAIGN  
TO BOOST RECYCLINGLOVE FOOD,  
REDUCE WASTE
“MY WASTE IS FROM THE 
UNUSED FOOD. I DEFINITELY 
OVER BUY AND STORE TOO 
MUCH. I DO COMPOST BUT 
IT’S LIKE I’M JUST PUTTING 
MONEY IN THE COMPOST BIN 
ON SOME DAYS.”“I HAVE SEEN THAT MOST OF 
MY FAMILY’S FOOD WASTE IS 
COMING FROM THE FRIDGE 
AND THE CUPBOARD VIA FOOD 
THAT HAS GONE OFF.”
 Visit www.newham.gov.uk/recycling for the Council’s online Recycleopedia to see what you can and 
can’t recycle, when your recycling collection day is, and how to report missed collections.
9
Newham’s Climate Emergency Annual Report 2020-2021Newham Food Champions
We are scoping work to develop Food Champions (with a 
climate emergency mission) out of the huge success of Covid 
Health Champions. This is an ongoing partnership with our 
Recycling Team. These champions are community figures 
supporting residents, including with information about 
the benefits of a healthy low carbon diet. They will also 
share useful information about Council initiatives on food. 
Perhaps most importantly it’s about listening to residents and 
addressing any issues or concerns. 
Newham Food Alliance
The Newham Food Alliance, a coalition of community groups, 
businesses and the Council, has made a significant impact in 
supporting people struggling through the Covid pandemic. It 
now has 32 organisational members, who are working with the 
Council to integrate the important actions of improving health 
outcomes and responding to the climate emergency into the 
programme plans. This links to over a hundred organisations in 
total, maximising the impact we have.
The Newham Food Alliance has resulted in over 1,850 tonnes 
of surplus food being used as part of the Council’s pandemic 
response to support vulnerable households, equating to 
approximately 7,000 tonnes of carbon saved. The Newham 
Food Alliance partnership has been a crucial lifeline for 
many families and we are proud to be building on these 
achievements to prevent food waste and feed families during 
the most extreme and challenging of times.WHAT WE HAVE ACHIEVED IN THE LAST YEAR:
Trinity Community  
CentreBonny Downs Community Association
Ahmadiyya Muslim Association Newham Aston-Mansfield
Newham Chinese  
Association10Young People Food Security Initiative 
We have also launched the Young People and Food Security 
initiative, as part of ongoing plans to address poverty and 
inequality in Newham. In January 2021, Mayor Fiaz announced 
the launch of an expert-led food security initiative to stamp 
out food insecurity facing children and young people in the 
borough.
Building on the raft of measures put in place to support 
Newham children and families during the Covid-19 pandemic, 
valued at over £9.6 million to date; and in line with the 
Council’s ‘Towards a Better Newham’ recovery action plan, 
the initiative will address the impact of food insecurity facing 
young people in the Borough, including holiday hunger. Based 
on the principals of healthy eating and reducing food waste 
as part of our Climate Emergency response, the initiative has 
input from world-renowned experts and is supported by the 
Health Foundation, the UK’s leading health promotion charity.
The ‘Young People and Food Security’ initiative will work with 
children, young people and their families to map the scale of 
food security challenges facing households in Newham. The 
work of the experts will shape a new strategy and programme 
of interventions to tackle holiday hunger facing young people 
which will be launched in summer 2021.The initiative builds on the £6 million annual investment the 
Council makes in the Eat for Free programme to support 
the health and well-being of all primary school children in 
Newham; and reflects the ambition of Mayor Fiaz to address 
poverty facing Newham’s young people across all age groups. 
Some local authorities are exploring environmental reasons for 
implementation free school meals, in addition to the obviously 
benefits for children’s health and educational performance. 
Newham is a leader in the approach, integrating free school 
meals with our public health, healthy foods, and climate 
emergency approaches.
We understand that High in Fats Salts & Sugar (HFSS) products 
are some of the most exploitative foods and drinks for nature 
and the environment, and are highly unhealthy for our diets.  
The production process for highly chemically processed food 
uses vast amounts of energy. Commonly used ingredients such 
as sugar and palm oil result in habitat destruction, with factory 
farming meat having one of the highest environmental impacts. 
Therefore, tackling the climate emergency must come hand 
in hand with making food more sustainable and encouraging 
people to adjust how they eat. CLIMATE AND IMPROVING 
HEALTH AND WELL BEING11
Newham’s Climate Emergency Annual Report 2020-2021The pandemic has brought one of the most economically 
challenging periods Newham has ever faced. Our residents 
have been among those worst affected in both economic 
and health terms. Some 33,000 have been furloughed, with 
a 21 per cent take-up rate - the highest in London. Our 
business community has been shaken to its core. 
We have grasped this moment to change the economic 
foundations of our society, building on our Community 
Wealth Building and inclusive economy approaches to 
tackle poverty and inequality including the marginalisation 
and exploitation that this generates. Integrating the 
principals of ‘stratification economics’ which addresses 
group based inequality driven by race, gender and class, our 
economic approach will ensure that  the wealth created in 
the borough stays in the borough to support the economic 
wellbeing of our residents living here, and to provide 
opportunities for our talented young people in an age of 
rapid economic change. Central to this is creating a green 
economy to provide quality, high skilled and well paid jobs 
for local people. Our Towards a Better Newham recovery 
strategy further embeds this, with health and wellbeing 
identified as key determinants of our economic success. A GREEN ECONOMIC FUTURE
COVID-19  
has had biggest 
impact on  
Newham33,000 
residents on 
furlough
£
21%
take-up rate12WHAT WE HAVE ACHIEVED IN THE 
LAST YEAR:
Embedding Green Business practises
One of our flagship policies has been our Community Wealth 
Building Pledge. Launched in November 2020, this encourages 
local businesses to join and to commit to sustainable practices 
and behaviours.
We have worked closely alongside local businesses, ensuring 
access to grants to support them during the crisis. To date we 
have given over £100 million business support grants to over 
5,000 businesses and over £100 million rates relief to 2,7995 
businesses.  Importantly we have been using these funds to 
encourage adoption of more environmentally sustainable 
practices, embedding our green principles and our Community 
Wealth Building values of fair employment, local procurement, 
and an inclusive economy.
When these grants come to an end, businesses will continue 
to be supported to adopt green ambitions through our 
Community Wealth Building Pledge grants. These provide up 
to £10,000 for businesses committed to our pledge ambitions, 
and to support businesses adopt green practises and reduce 
carbon emissions in the borough.A Just Transition for Skills
We have begun to look at developing a ‘just transition’ 
approach for skills. This is about ensuring that local people, 
particularly young people, can take full advantage of the new 
opportunities that come with a shift to a green economy. To 
this end we have been working with trade unions, local training 
providers, and the further and higher education sectors in 
Newham to encourage the development of courses to enable 
local people to develop their skills and secure jobs in the green 
technology sector. For example, we have been working with 
Hobbs Academy to provide free courses to Newham residents 
on digital visualisation, 3D printing, and Architectural, and 
Product Model Making, with a focus on sustainable methods 
of construction.  
WHAT WE WILL DO IN THE FUTURE
In last year’s report, we made clear our intentions to establish 
the Royal Docks as a hub for innovative and green enterprise.  
We have progressed this and the next stage of work has begun. 
Through our leadership role in the Royal Docks Enterprise 
Zone, the only one in London and located in Newham through 
a collaboration between the Mayor of Newham and the 
Mayor of London, we will be undertaking research and driving 
plans to develop the Green innovation and enterprise hub in 
conjunction with local anchor institutions and businesses as 
part of our transition to a green economy. SUSTAINABLE ECONOMICS
QUEEN’S MARKET
BARBERSPUBNAIL SA LON
SHOP
5  As of June 202113
Newham’s Climate Emergency Annual Report 2020-2021Newham spends over £300 million per year with its suppliers. 
Our entire approach to procurement is being transformed 
under this administration.  Instead of simply seeking the lowest 
cost and looking no further, we now use our expenditure to 
ensure that contracts deliver additional social value for our 
communities, the environment and the local economy. 
We are opening up our procurements to local businesses by 
ensuring that they have early visibility of opportunities and 
looking for ways for our supply chain to support the delivery 
of added value from its procurement spend. Our exciting 
Social Value plans will help us to deliver and report on our 
priorities. 
Benefits are already being seen through our Living Wage 
Accreditation, meaning that all suppliers are required to offer 
the London Living Wage, and promote employee rights. Other 
achievements we have progressed through our changes to the 
procurement framework will have a sizable impact on carbon 
emissions. For example, we are encouraging local sustainable 
suppliers in our procurement and in the wider Council’s supply 
chain. We are ensuring that all opportunities are taken to 
help support our climate change targets through our work 
with suppliers, as well as supporting the local economic to 
thrive and expand local job opportunities for our residents. 
Our facilities management team are also accelerating changes 
towards our carbon neutral and carbon zero targets. We are 
also working to decarbonise the Council’s pension fund.WHAT WE HAVE ACHIEVED IN THE 
LAST YEAR:
Energy management to reduce emissions
Our Energy Policy and Energy Management Plan aims to 
reduce carbon emissions by 30 per cent from the Council’s 
operational buildings by the end of the financial year 2024-
25. This equates to a reduction of 13,504 tonnes of CO2, and 
a decrease of approximately 73 per cent since 2014-15. Part 
of this approach includes moving to 100 per cent renewable 
electricity for Council operated buildings, including corporate 
offices, libraries and community centres, streetlight and 
communal lighting in council owned blocks. Based on London 
Borough of Newham’s energy consumption, our new energy 
contracts will also save around £1.75m over three and half 
years.6  
We successfully bid for a £2.7m grant through the Public 
Sector Decarbonisation Scheme to help decarbonise our 
corporate headquarters, Newham Dockside. The grant is 
linked to the installation of energy efficient LED lighting, solar 
panels, and an environmentally friendly heat pump for heating 
and cooling the building. These projects are a significant step 
forward in the Council’s Climate Emergency Action Plan, taking 
us closer to our commitment to become carbon neutral by 
2030 and carbon zero by 2050. PROCUREMENT, ESTATE  
MANAGEMENT, AND PENSIONS 
- A GREEN APPROACH TO OUR SPENDING  
AND INVESTMENT  POWER
6   Based on the last year cost avoidance report.14A radical shift in procurement
Our procurement has shifted radically over the past three years, 
including increased focus on environmental priorities. Our 
team is actively engaging with Council services to help identify 
sustainable purchases as practise. Other continuous efforts 
include reviewing existing contracts to ensure environmental 
standards are considered, and training staff to better identify 
these measures.
Pensions
The Newham Pension Fund was the first in London to develop 
and implement a ground-breaking Environmental, Social and 
Governance policy. This policy commits us to reducing fossil 
fuel exposure as quickly as possible, and to an absolute policy 
of not investing in tobacco or arms. The Newham Pensions 
Fund’s fossil fuel company exposure is already among the 
lowest 10 per cent in the country is on track to halve to below 
half a percentage point of its investment assets by 2022.  
In July 2020 we took another key step forward. The Pensions 
Committee approved a decision to move £200m of equity 
assets to a more socially responsible fund. These assets are 
now in an environmental, social, and corporate governance 
friendly index.  This index has a much lower carbon exposure 
than the standard index and does not invest in coal extraction 
companies. This is not the end point of the decarbonisation 
of our pensions, but represents a significant step forward. Our 
ultimately goal is 100 per cent decarbonisation, which we do 
that as quickly as possible, but must be careful not to lose 
the fund’s assets –the pension money of Council’s employees 
– by doing the transition too swiftly and breaching legal 
requirements in the process.Care workers
We have been looking at innovative ways of reducing carbon in 
all aspects of our work we do. For example, we examined how 
we work with our care workers, including how we can better 
support them, which has included paying them the living wage. 
We went beyond this, to shift to a ‘patch- based’ care approach, 
linking workers to specific areas. This enables care workers to 
be more embedded in their local community. It also reduces 
travel distance and time, promoting more walking and cycling, 
with the knock-on effect of reducing carbon emissions and 
improving air quality.
WHAT WE WILL DO IN THE FUTURE:
Our Pensions Committee is currently working with the joint 
pensions funds of other London Boroughs, the London 
Collective Investment Vehicle, to ensure low carbon 
investments are included in portfolios. Our own pension 
scheme will be carrying out work in 2021/22 on measuring 
carbon exposure in the investment portfolio, taking our zero 
carbon ambitions to the next step. As noted, our progress has 
been very successful and our exposure is already amongst the 
lowest in the country. We will move as quickly as we can whilst 
protecting our pensioners’ money.
We are in the process of scoping projects proposed for this 
Council headquarters building to decarbonise emissions 
produced by the building. These projects include installation  
of heat pumps, LED lighting, and solar generation at the 
site. Our aspiration for this project mean decreasing carbon 
emission by more than 50 per cent carbon emissions at our 
Dockside headquarters.  
PROCUREMENT, ESTATE  
MANAGEMENT, AND PENSIONS 
- A GREEN APPROACH TO OUR SPENDING AND 
INVESTMENT  POWER15
Newham’s Climate Emergency Annual Report 2020-2021With a quarter of Newham’s CO2 emissions coming from 
domestic energy use, developing green, sustainable homes for 
the future is one of our most important goals. This includes 
reducing wasted energy through poor insulation and inefficient 
heating systems. This is closely linked to improving health and 
tackling poverty. Through bold steps we can make our homes 
more sustainable and more affordable. Addressing Newham’s 
chronic housing crisis is a cornerstone of the council’s policies, 
and also intrinsically linked to our green economy plans, with 
the potential for high quality construction jobs.
Our approach spans our newly built homes, improving our 
existing council homes and helping those in the private sector 
to meet green energy standards. From starting to build 1,000 
social-rent homes during the Mayor’s first term to retro-fitting 
our existing council homes to address fuel poverty, we are 
making significant progress through innovative approaches. We 
seek to build on the bold, innovative design and planning to 
promote greener living. 
WHAT WE HAVE ACHIEVED IN THE 
LAST YEAR:
Fuel Poverty
We have worked to improve the energy efficiency of domestic 
properties and reduce fuel poverty. We have formalised links 
with a fuel poverty referral network SHINE, funded by Greater 
London Authority. This gives free energy advice and visits to 
Newham residents. It sets out Newham’s flexible eligibility 
criteria to access free loft and cavity wall insulation for 
households living in energy inefficient properties.
We have also taken key steps in making our council owned 
housing more energy efficient. This has included replacing old-
style sodium lamps with efficient light-emitting diode (LED) 
lighting in communal areas of blocks of flats to reduce energy 
consumption and running costs.
Updating Gas Boilers - investment in cleaner, cheaper 
heating
We have made significant investment to replace inefficient 
gas boilers with high efficiency ones.  We are developing 
a medium-term plan to replace all boilers with renewable 
energy alternatives. This work goes hand in hand with ongoing 
projects to improve the energy efficiency of buildings, 
included as part of the capital programme. This entails providing resources to improve thermal efficiency through 
external insulation, replacement windows, doors and roofs. 
Housing Delivery Strategy
These actions are in line with our Housing Delivery Strategy, 
which sets out our high standards for low-energy homes 
in new Council-led developments, and how we are using 
planning powers to ensure that homes delivered by our 
partners are also ambitious. We will be starting a programme 
of energy-efficient retrofit across Council properties and 
using the landlord licensing scheme to address poor energy 
management and standards in the Private Rented Sector. We 
also are exploring an innovative retrofit scheme that would 
incentivise owner-occupiers to invest in making older homes 
more energy efficient.
WHAT WE WILL DO IN THE FUTURE:
Housing is key to how we develop a greener economy. 
Populo Living, our wholly owned housing company, allows 
us be ambitious in our targets and efforts. In the future our 
innovation will continue to explore new ideas, such as the 
‘Big Green Loft’ pilot, and we’ll be accelerating ambitious 
retrofitting projects and exploring the potential of installing 
renewable energy sources in our council housing stock and 
community centres.GREEN HOMES FOR THE FUTURE
1HOMES FOR PEOPLE: NEWHAM HOUSING DELIVERY STRATEGY 2021 - 2025
HOMES FOR 
PEOPLE:
NEWHAM HOUSING 
DELIVERY STRATEGY.
Post-consultation version
WE ARE NEWHAM.
Energy efficiency has improved over the decades  
Average Heat 
consumption, 
kWh/m2/year
EPC: D/E
EPC: D/C
EPC: A/BFor illustration, we looked at homes 
in representative Newham streets 
from different eras.16The value of our local outdoor places has been increased 
during the pandemic, and is ever more important for our 
everyday life and well-being. It is our mission is to ensure that 
the borough’s spaces are green and liveable, accessible, safe 
and high-quality places for leisure, recreation and exercise. 
This will contribute to a cleaner, healthier, more sustainable 
environment, reducing CO2 levels and other airborne 
pollutants and allowing wildlife to thrive. 
As a society, we consume more goods than ever before. Put in 
very simple terms: we need to dispose less and recycle and reuse 
more. Only 17 per cent of Newham household waste is sent to 
recycling centres. What we do throw away needs to be done 
in the greenest way possible. We have been developing a more 
environmentally friendly waste disposal management approach, 
whilst supporting residents to recycle more, and use less. Transport on our roads is a key contributor to our carbon 
emissions. We want pleasant streets with less congestion 
and pollution, through more sustainable transport which 
encourages walking, cycling and public transport. We are 
proud to have pushed work forward with this, through the 
Covid-related TfL Streetspace Plan funding. Substantial steps 
have been taken to green our vehicle fleet and incentivise 
lower and zero emission vehicles. AN ENVIRONMENT FOR ALL
17
Newham’s Climate Emergency Annual Report 2020-2021WHAT WE HAVE ACHIEVED IN THE 
LAST YEAR:
Building on past actions, we brought our Parks and 
Open Spaces back in-house to allow us to better direct 
improvements across our green spaces. We have already 
seen the benefits. Our tree planting programme has begun, 
permanently and positively transforming the character of 
our borough, contributing to air quality improvements and 
introducing more greening in our local neighbourhoods.
Working with Trees for Cities and City Hall, our tree planting 
project kicked-off in Beckton in 2020 with 9,000 saplings being 
planted. This alone will contribute towards increasing London’s 
tree canopy by 10 per cent by 2050. Together we have 
subsequently planted 712 trees in the Royal Docks area, 313 in 
wards with an insufficient tree canopy cover, and a further 288 
trees planted on our highways and residential streets.
Our Parks and Green Spaces Strategy and Plans, published 
in April, sets out how we will ensure these valued public 
spaces are maintained to the highest standards. This includes 
surveying wildlife habitats, developing a management plan for 
East Ham Nature Reserve, waterbodies and woodland areas. WHAT WE WILL DO IN THE FUTURE:
These efforts are changing the borough, and we won’t stop 
here. Beckon District Park will be used to create areas of 
conservation meadow to provide additional habitat. Our 
conservation management of East Ham Nature Reserve will 
enhance and protect this area. We are developing a Parks 
Strategy with a focus on enhancing our parks assets, with 
further plans for nature recovery and urban forests.  
We will also improve the quality, biodiversity and resilience of 
the Barrington open space through the creation of woodland 
habitat areas. Through planting more trees in this area we will 
create a green corridor, connecting Barrington Open all the 
way through to Leigh Road Sports Ground.
Our tree planting will continue with an additional 3,500 plus 
trees. This will increase canopy cover, helping to remove 
pollutants from the air, improve air quality, absorb carbon 
dioxide emissions, and reduce noise pollution. 
We are implementing the principle of 15-minute 
neighbourhoods in Newham, through intended changes 
to our Local Plan, the way we design our neighbourhoods, 
where we locate essential services and how we will revive our 
high streets; so that all such amenities are within a 15-minute 
walk or cycle for residents to reduce the reliance on cars 
and associated pollution. Finally, through our local plan we 
will ensure that, at minimum, there will be no net loss of 
designated green space in the borough, that we will identify 
and signpost resources regarding the best planting and 
landscaping interventions in relation to air quality, and that we 
delivery the Lea River Park projects as specifically new green 
space. GREENING THE BOROUGH
18In August 2020 we began a successful trial of weekly recycling, 
accepting a wider range of materials for recycling.  Weekly 
recycling will be rolled out across the borough later in 2021.  
Our “one bin no waste approach” also aims to reduce fly 
tipping in the borough.  
Previously around 100 housing blocks in Newham didn’t have 
the facilities to recycle. We have now provided all of these 
blocks with new user friendly recycle bins, accompanied 
by resident engagement to inform what can and cannot be 
recycled. 
We will also expand the range of materials that can be put 
in the recycling bins from this year. These will add aerosols, 
plastic pots, tubs and trays and glass making it easier for 
people to increase the amount of items they recycle. 
Our anti-fly tipping work has accelerated, in collaboration with 
Keep Britain Tidy, as we recognise that our climate approach is 
about reclaiming our borough as a positive environment for all 
our residents.
Sustainable Fashion Accelerator
Our work with the London Legacy Development Corporation 
(LLDC) in the Queen Elizabeth Park area has resulted in the 
commissioning of The Trampery to offer a 6 month Fashion 
Accelerator targeting Newham residents. This is opening 
new pathways into employment, allowing our residents to 
learn new skills, develop ideas around recycled fashion and 
sustainability, which will contribute to the shift to more 
conscientious consumer consumption and a move away from 
‘throw-away’ and ‘fast fashion’ culture.WHAT WE WILL DO IN THE FUTURE:
We have approved a new recycling and waste management 
strategy, delivered by the four East London Boroughs of 
Newham, Havering, Barking and Dagenham and Redbridge 
through the East London Waste Authority (ELWA). 
This strategy outlines our ambitions in terms of decreasing 
the environmental impact of our waste and increasing re-use 
and recycling. With a joint recycling target of 35 per cent, this 
strategy will also outline the ambitions of the four councils in 
terms of decreasing the environmental impact of our waste 
and increasing re-use and recycling.  
We will also be promoting circular economy initiatives and 
work with local reuse and repair organisations. Our aspiration 
is for Newham to lead the way in green consumerism.
Finally, our anti-fly tipping work will progress to the next 
stage, focusing on designing out fly tipping. We encourage 
‘community takeover’ of underused and under-loved spaces, 
turning places that are often unsanitary and unwelcoming into 
usable and enjoyable public spaces.
CASE STUDY:  
DESIGNING OUT FLY TIPPING
We have secured funding to pilot potential solutions to  
fly-tipping, through our collaboration with Keep Britain Tidy. 
One example is our chalk paint stencils that highlight the cost 
of removing fly tips were stencilled on locations from which 
fly-tips had been removed.  The aim of the chalk paint stencils 
intervention is to drive behaviour change by highlight that  
fly-tips don’t just simply disappear, but have lasting impacts  
on the community. Our pilot had:
•  Up to 67 per cent reduction in fly-tipping during the 
intervention
•  After the intervention, fly-tipping remained 63 per cent  
lower before
•  In the residents surveys carried out:
 -  46 per cent respondents felt it made them think twice 
what will they do with their unwanted furniture
 
-  58 per cent respondents felt that the intervention showed 
that Newham Council is working to tackle fly-tipping REDUCING WASTE AND  
INCREASING RECYCLING
19
Newham’s Climate Emergency Annual Report 2020-2021Improving air quality and reducing pollution goes hand in 
hand with addressing the climate emergency. It is one of 
the single biggest health challenges for our borough.  The 
disproportionate impact of air pollution on communities 
of colour across the country is well established. Just as 
communities in the global south are those most adversely 
affected by the consequence of climate crisis, communities 
of colour in boroughs like Newham have for too long been 
overlooked in conversations on clean air.7 
According to Public Health England, Newham has the highest 
death rate attributable to particulate air pollution in the 
country.8 Poor-quality air disproportionately affects the 
borough’s poorest residents, who tend to live on the most 
heavily used roads. Our data shows that there is a correlation 
between car ownership and average income – and we know 
that the poorest communities are least likely to drive cars 
but most likely to be affected by poor air quality. The health 
impacts of exposure to PM2.5 is the equivalent of every 
person, including babies and children, smoking 159 cigarettes 
per year. Another study found that seven out of every 100 
deaths linked to dirty air, totalling 96 deaths each year.9  
Newham also has the highest rate of child hospitalisation for 
asthma related conditions in the country, with 4,500 admitted 
every year with life debilitating respiratory conditions. A 
recent study by Imperial College London estimates that 
without recent London-wide air quality policies Without the 
Mayor’s air quality policies and other general air pollution 
trends, a child born in 2013 would lose 7 to 11 months of life 
expectancy due to air pollution.10 
One in seven (14%) of Newham’s population and the entire 
town centres of Stratford, East Ham, Forest Gate and Canning 
Town are exposed to levels of Nitrogen dioxide (NO2) that are 
above the UK limit value for human health. The entire Borough 
exceeds the World Health Organisation guide limit for PM2.5 
particulates 
Again, Covid-19 has highlighted the scale of this problem, 
and with emerging research suggests exposure to poor air 
can increase the risks and deaths of Covid-19.11  Furthermore, 
it has also been shown that low traffic schemes provide the 
greatest benefits to more deprived area.12  The tragic impact 
of Covid-19 since March last year has only strengthened our 
resolve to ensure our residents breathe in an air that is not 
damaging to their health.Road transport is amongst our biggest pollutants. We need to 
change the way we travel to ensure it becomes increasingly 
environmentally friendly. One significant step is our emissions-
based parking charges, outlined below. Our upcoming 
transport strategy will further set out our sustainable 
transport approach.
WHAT WE HAVE ACHIEVED IN THE 
LAST YEAR:
In 2020, we made further progress on our ambitious five-year 
Air Quality Action Plan. The plan seeks to reduce pollution 
in and around schools, and extend school audits; improve 
walking and cycling infrastructure and support regular car 
free days and temporary road closures in high footfall areas. 
Our Healthy Street Approach supports the creation and 
deployment of infrastructure to support the widespread 
adoption of zero emission transport and zero emission 
buildings.
We have greatly expanded our air quality monitoring network, 
which now captures 90 per cent of all air data, and we have 
invested in 25 additional low-cost sensors to improve our 
work. Our efforts will focus around school streets, monitoring 
each and every school. We also have secured a City Airport 
monitoring officer to ensure that London City Airport’s 
approved Air Quality Monitoring Strategy is functioning as 
agreed.
People Friendly Streets and Liveable Neighbourhood 
schemes
We have delivered a number of People Friendly Streets 
schemes to alleviate the burden of air pollution on Newham 
residents and their health. Our Browning Road pilot traffic 
scheme has become permanent after reducing air pollution 
and average of 28 per centby up to 40 per cent. Traffic counts 
at Browning Road Bridge show that traffic volumes have 
reduced by up to 62 per cent (3,000 vehicles per day) between 
7am and 7pm. This has significantly reduced the volume of 
harmful chemicals air pollution our residents are exposed to 
on a daily basis.IMPROVING OUR AIR QUALITY 
AND SUSTAINABLE TRANSPORT
7  www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/10/londons-black-communities-disproportionately-exposed-to-air-pollution-study
8   https:/ /fingertips.phe.org.uk/search/air%20pollution#page/3/gid/1000002/pat/6/par/E12000007/ati/102/are/E09000030/iid/30101/age/230/sex/4/cid/4/
tbm/1/page-options/tre-ao-1
9  https://www.newham.gov.uk/public-health-safety/air-quality-newham
10  https:/ /www.london.gov.uk/press-releases/mayoral/new-imperial-study-on-mayors-aq-policies
11  https://www.escardio.org/The-ESC/Press-Office/Press-releases/study-estimates-exposure-to-air-pollution-increases-covid-19-deaths-by-15-world
12  https:/ /www.theguardian.com/world/ng-interactive/2021/mar/02/low-traffic-schemes-benefit-most-deprived-londoners-study-finds20Anti-idling campaign
As part of this campaign, Idling Action project officers and 
Newham Air Quality officers have been delivering anti-idling 
activities (workshops and action events) to primary schools 
for its year 4, 5 and 6 classes. This has taught pupils about 
the importance of air quality to empower them to think of 
ways they can reduce their exposure to pollution, and engage 
teachers and parents to act, persuading drivers and passers-by 
to switch off their engines when parked outside schools. Our 
campaign has been supported by billboards illustrating the 
public health consequences of idling.Emissions based parking
Our new system of emissions-based parking scheme, which has 
already been adopted by 16 local authorities in London, seeks 
to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by encouraging residents 
to switch towards less polluting vehicles as well as considering 
taking more local trips by sustainable modes of transport, 
like walking, cycling and public transport.  It also supports 
the majority of local residents who do not own a car and are 
reliant on public transport, so that they stop subsidising car 
use through their Council Tax.  Additionally, to support a ‘just 
transition’ to the new emissions based parking scheme, we 
have introduced a 40 per cent reduction in the costs of the 
scheme to car owners for the first 12 months in recognition 
of the economic impact of Covid-19 on household incomes. 
Additionally, to help support the switch to hybrid and electric 
vehicles, there is no CO2 charge for this type of vehicle. 
Whole School Asthma approach
The Newham School Health team is supporting all schools to 
have a whole school asthma approach, through coordinating 
with our valued school partners, ensuring that our young 
people can have the best quality health possible.
Working with our local businesses
Engagement with businesses is a key part of our approach. Our 
work on the first round of the Zero Emissions Network (ZEN) 
reduced dangerous Nitrogen Oxide (NOx) emissions by 114.2kg 
a year. This was achieved through several different schemes 
including:  
•  Trailing of zero emission cargo bikes for delivery, resulted 
in the purchase of seven bikes for permanent use: NOx 
emissions reduced by 30.8kg a year.
•  Free business membership to Zipcar: NOx emissions reduced 
by 56.8kg a year.
•  Free cycle training and cycle workshop for ZEN members: 
NOx emissions reduced by 10.6kg a year.
Greening our Council vehicle fleet
We have made substantial progress this year in making our 
vehicle fleet more environmentally friendly. In July and August 
2020, we introduced a Gas-To-Liquid (GTL) fuel alternative 
to diesel to reduce particulates and emissions. We are 
introducing 40 electric vans, and the first nine fully electric 
vehicles are now fully operational, with an additional 30 to 
arrive in August or September 2021. This is part of £20m of 
investment in renewing the fleet. Current leasing agreements 
will be changed at no extra cost to begin to replace our fleet 
with 170 new vans and 40 mini-buses that are all either fully 
electric (zero emission), mild hybrid or Euro 6 gas to liquid 
fuelled. The new vehicles will ensure the Council meet the 
legal standards required by the Ultra-Low Emission Zone due 
in October this year (2021). We are committed to having fully 
green fleet by 2030. Additionally we are investigating other 
measures to reduce vehicle use by moving to alternative 
methods where possible, such as cargo bikes.  IMPROVING OUR AIR QUALITY 
AND SUSTAINABLE TRANSPORT
21
Newham’s Climate Emergency Annual Report 2020-2021The shift to electric vehicles
We have begun in earnest the roll out of our Electric Charging 
Point Infrastructure. This makes it easier for residents to make 
the transition to electronic cars. Since last year’s report, we 
have installed 100 charging points, with a capacity to charge 
140 cars at one time. We are in discussions with suppliers to 
increase the borough’s chargers, and for an electric car friendly 
Newham.
We have installed six (two in partnership with the Royal Docks) 
Brompton Bike docks with eight bikes each at Royal Albert, 
Forest Gate, Manor Park and Maryland stations, Newham 
University hospital and the Royal Victoria Dock.  
WHAT WE WILL DO IN THE FUTURE:
One of our key powers as a Council is in planning. We will 
pursue our aspirations for cleaner air and our carbon emissions 
goals through the review of our Local Plan, which has 
commenced. This includes applying air quality conditions to 
relevant applications, and monitoring to enforce the air quality 
requirements in all these developments. Our planning approach 
will also ensure that all new development should be at least 
air quality neutral, setting in stone the need to protect and 
enhance our green spaces and infrastructure.
We are further examining ways to expand collaboration with 
schools to improve air quality, to find new ways of working 
with them to tackle the climate crisis and educate future 
generations. 
Our new transport strategy will put a sustainable future at the 
heart of our approach, looking at how we move away from 
polluting vehicles completely, encouraging public transport, 
walking, cycling, and car clubs. Our Brompton Bike Dock rollout 
will continue, with new docks at Royal Victoria, Pontoon Dock, 
and Royal Albert DLR station.
Given the fall in public transport revenue due to Covid, there 
is a challenging funding environment with our partners, making 
future investments potentially more difficult. However, the new 
opportunity we have is in re-examining how and why we travel. 
As our section on procurement illustrates, we have looked at 
reducing car journeys of our social care workers. Likewise, we 
will be examining ways of using increased remote working to 
reduce transport emissions. CASE STUDY: IMPROVEMENT 
WORKS IN STRATFORD REDUCING 
POLLUTION
Newham has implemented major improvement works within 
Stratford Town Centre to facilitate an attractive, accessible  
and people-friendly environment. This includes new cycle 
lanes, pedestrian pavement widening, green public spaces 
including sustainable urban drainage, new road crossings and 
removal of the one-way traffic flow.
Following a two-year study, we have found very encouraging 
reductions in air pollution. The results show an average 24 
per cent reduction in dangerous Nitrogen Dioxide pollution, 
a 53 per cent reduction in particulate matter 10 micrometres 
in diameter (PM10), and a 17 per cent reduction in particulate 
matter 2.5 micrometres in diameter (PM2.5). These reductions 
were greater than the overall decline in background pollution 
due to London and national air quality reduction initiatives  
and the Covid restrictions during the same time period.
This illustrates the effectiveness of our approach and how 
these changes are already having a profound impact on air 
quality, improving the air residents breathe in every day. IMPROVING OUR AIR QUALITY 
AND SUSTAINABLE TRANSPORT
22The Council is committed, through People Power for Newham, 
to deepening local democracy and participation to strengthen 
genuine participation at a local level. Not only is this pledge 
vital to the health of our democracy, it is critical to our 
effectiveness in tackling the climate emergency. 
The Citizens’ Assembly on Climate Change convened in early 
2020, emphasised the importance of empowering residents 
with information and awareness. Therefore the Council aspires 
to be “working with”, rather than ‘doing to’, people in Newham, 
working together to develop innovative ways to improve 
our environment, our health and achieve our climate goals. 
Our action plan recognises that taking forward our plans for 
climate zero by 2050 can only be done working hand in hand 
with residents and local organisations. 
 
After the Citizens’ Assembly reported with a series of 
recommendations, the Council responded and incorporated 
those ideas into our Climate Emergency Action Plan. In March 
2021 we met with participants to update them on our progress. 
The Council has been building on existing collaborative work 
with residents through the Citizen Assembly on Climate 
Emergency, and our vibrant Youth Assembly on the Climate Emergency, working together to shape our plans to meet our 
climate zero targets.  
This collaborative work has been vital in developing our action 
plan, in working through policies in areas such as housing, 
through co-production and co-design principles, and, thirdly, 
in helping residents work with us to adopt new, sustainable 
ways of living, working and travelling. 
WHAT WE HAVE ACHIEVED:
Publicly Available Air Quality Data 
Our Air Quality Action Plan commits us to make air quality 
data publicly available. We currently deploy one of the largest 
networks of air quality monitors in the country, which is crucial 
to understanding emissions concentrations. Having this data 
helps us to make decisions and employ technology, innovative 
and creative solutions to clean up dirty air in the borough 
through initiatives and projects in public health, transport, 
industry, planning and development. This information is now 
displayed on our website so that residents can see live air 
quality updates.INVOLVING AND EMPOWERING
OUR COMMUNITY  
Co-production and design23
Newham’s Climate Emergency Annual Report 2020-2021Youth Climate Assembly
Despite Covid-19 restrictions we held a vibrant interactive 
Youth Climate Change Summit earlier this year. Due to 
pandemic restrictions we had to think creatively about how 
we carry out some of our objectives. Our Climate Change 
Youth Summit took place in a digital space during April, 
through a series of workshops, some of which have used 
exciting virtual reality immersive experiences focused on the 
climate emergency. This is a topic that young people have 
been extremely active in and we wish to expand on it even 
further.
In order to ensure that we have a clear and consistent 
approach to engaging and involving residents across Council 
services, we are developing a resident participation framework. 
The framework will identify good practice and support council 
staff to adopt and apply participatory and co-production 
approaches to policy and service development. This 
commitment follows the recommendation of the Democracy 
and Civic Participation Commission in 2020 that the Council 
should work with local people to develop a framework of 
mutual expectations around participation and involvement.
Future:
COP26
The coming months will define the global response to climate 
change. With the upcoming 2021 United Nations Climate 
Change Conference (COP26), we will be vocal to ensure our 
concerns and our achievements are heard. We will call on central government to do more, but also show how we as 
Council will tackle these problems. Finally, we will engage with 
our residents to make sure we hear them and that we work 
together to tackle climate change. 
People Power 
Newham has an innovative approach to participatory 
democracy and resident engagement. Building on the 
community assemblies we convened from 2018, we held 16 
community assemblies in our 8 community neighbourhoods 
in April 2021 that gave residents direct influence to create a 
shared vision for the place where they live, work or learn and to 
help shape its development and growth. Each neighbourhood 
has been allocated approximately £100,000 funding to spend 
on improving the area. 
From May 2021 we are trialling a standing Citizens’ Assembly  
for a year, giving residents the chance to directly impact 
how decisions that affect their lives are taken forward. This 
builds upon existing local Citizens Assemblies and Forums on 
issues from Climate Emergency to budget spending, on co-
production and co-design principles and further opening up 
transparency and decision making. 
Residents have been given the opportunity to select the topics 
they will debate and explore. Their deliberations are expected 
to further inform our climate emergency action plan as the 
two broad themes that have been selected are “greening the 
borough” and “the 15-minute borough”. INVOLVING AND EMPOWERING
OUR COMMUNITY  
24In November 2021, the 26th United Nations Climate Change 
Conference (COP26) is set to take place. This is an important 
opportunity for the nations of the world to come together to 
discuss the challenges facing our carbon emissions targets. It is 
also an opportunity to push governments to better resource 
our collective response.
The UK government has already set a more ambitious 2035 
deadline for a 78 per cent emissions cut. While this is a 
positive step forward, ambitions on paper are not the same 
as a concrete plans and meaningful support. This new target 
has not come with any details on new funding or powers with 
which we could reduce our carbon emissions or to help others 
to do the same.
At Newham we understand that central government support 
is an essential part of meeting emissions targets. We will 
continue to press the government to be bolder and to back up 
their vision with support for local authorities, businesses, and 
residents. We will use our influence as a Council to ensure that 
central government hears our residents’ voices and concerns.
We have an ambitious project to help us deliver our goals, to 
plant more trees, insulate homes, improve our air quality and 
catalyse our transition to a green economy. This will continue 
in the context of Covid and our recovery - build back fairer, 
better, greener and healthier. However, the next big step we 
need to take as a Council is developing a clear roadmap to 
meet our emissions targets, which reflects new benchmark set 
by government of reducing carbon emissions by 78 percent by 
2035 as set out in the Sixth Carbon Budget published in April 
2021. 
We will look across the key areas to see what we still need 
to do, what the challenges are, what is possible and what 
further support may be needed from government. For 
instance, renovating the UK’s draughty homes to low-carbon standards within the next four years would create 100,000 
jobs, cut people’s energy bills, increase tax revenue and bring 
tens of billions in economic benefits, according to estimates 
by the construction industry. As part of our contribution 
to a ‘national retrofit strategy’, we have already started an 
innovative programme of decarbonising Council homes in 
Newham, and through our ‘Big Green Lofts’ pilot launched 
by our housing delivery company, Populo Living. We will be 
lobbying government to support us through providing us with 
the resources we need to accelerate these transformative 
programmes.
The response to Climate Emergency is part of a global effort 
and agreed targets, which require collective efforts, and 
Newham will be leading the way in local government. 
Our approach will continue to embody collaborative 
principles. We are committed to putting our people at the 
heart of everything we do, working as active partners. We 
call on our residents to get involved in any way they can, be 
that participating in our public events, becoming air quality 
champions, or simply recycling more.NEXT STEPS 
We can boost sustainability even further…
Once on site, there are several sustainable technologies we could add to the pilot loft conversions to improve efficiency. 
A ‘green roof’ costs around £70 per m2
Solar PV panels
cost £4 -5K
Water Butts
cost £50 or less  
 Extractor fans can 
cost around £100 
to installGREENER HOMES:
25
Newham’s Climate Emergency Annual Report 2020-20211.
  
Planning for carbon 
zero in our housing 
stock, including 
the launch of new 
innovative Green 
housing products 
such as the ‘Big 
Green Loft’ scheme 
we are piloting 
2.  
 
Developing our 
green economy 
approach, including 
in the Royal Docks
 
 
3.
Implementing a 
whole system’s 
approach to healthy 
eating which 
identifies healthy 
food as low carbon 
food
4.
Develop a roadmap 
to meet our carbon 
emissions targets 5.
A transport strategy 
that leads to 
better health and 
sustainability
6.
 
Parks and green 
spaces: reshaping 
the borough for a 
green future
7.
Embedding our 
work with residents 
and supporting 
behaviour changes 
through our People 
Power for Newham 
approachNEXT STEPS 
GREENER HOMES:26www.newham.gov.uk