PAPER NO. 21-61  
 
WANDSWORTH BOROUGH COUNCIL  
 
FINANCE , RESOURCES AND CLIMATE SUSTAINABILITY OVERVIEW AND 
SCRUTINY COMMITTEE – 10 FEBRUARY 2021 
 
EXECUTIVE – 22 FEBRUARY 2021  
 
Report by the Chief Executive on the update to the Wandsworth Environment and 
Sustainability Strategy (WESS) Action Plan  
 
SUMMARY  
On 17th July 2019, Wandsworth Council declared a Climate Emergency, 
setting a target to be a carbon neutral organisation by 2030.  In January 2020, 
the Finance  and Corporate  Resources Overview and Scrutiny Committee  and 
the Executive approved an annual action plan which set out a series of 
actions to deliver its ambitious ten -year Wandsworth Environment and 
Susta inability Strategy (WESS).  
This paper provides an update on progress made in the delivery of the WESS 
Action Plan during 2020, including purchasing zero carbon electr icity, 
delivering  the successful  Wandsworth Climate Summit, the development of 
the draft Local Plan and the delivery of electr ic vehicle chargepoints , more 
bikehangars and school streets. The paper also provides an overview of the 
Council’s Scope 1 and 2 carbon emissions  for 2019 /20 and presents  an 
updated WESS Action Plan for 2021 . This includes plans to develop a 
Decarbonisation Strat egy for Council  buildings, a plan to switch vehicles to 
zero emission options , as well as actions on supporting the green economy, 
reducing emissions from social housing, a food waste trial and more tree 
planting.  
Taking action on climate change remains a key priority for the Council . 
Delivery of its climate actions continu ed throughout the challenges that 2020 
posed. The 2021 Action Plan presents an opportunity to continue and 
accelerate this progress.   
 
GLOSSARY  
 
BEIS  - Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy  
CDP  - Carbon Disclosure Project  
COVID -19 - Infectious disease caused by coronavirus SARS -CoV-2 
CREW  - Community energy cooperative based in south -west London  
ESG  - Environmental, Social and Governance issues  
EPC - Energy Performance Certificate  
EV - Electric vehicle  Wandsworth Environment and Sustainability Strategy 
(WESS) Action Plan Update   
Page 2 of 19 
(Paper No. 21 -61) Official  
LASER  - Public sector energy procurement and energy management service 
providers  
LED - Light emitting diode  
LGA - Local Government Association  
OSC  - Overview and Scrutiny Committee  
TfL - Transport for London  
UCL - University College London  
WESS  - Wandsworth Environment and Sustainability Strategy  
 
 
Recommendations  
 
1. The Finance , Resources and Climate Sustainability Overview and Scrutiny 
Committee are  recommended to support the recommendations in paragraph 3 
below.  
 
2. If the Overview and Scrutiny Committee approve any views, comments or  
recommendations on the report, these will be submitted to the Executive and/or 
the General Purposes Committee for their consideration.  
 
3. The Executive is recommended to:  
 
a) Note the progress made in delivery o f the Wandsworth Environment and 
Sustainability Strategy and Action Plan  at Appendix A . 
b) Note the 2019/20 carbon emissions data for Wandsworth and the 
decrease  in emissions on 2018/19 . 
c) Approve the updated Wandsworth Environment and Sustainability  
Strategy  Action Plan  at Appendix B . 
d) Approve the allocations within the existing Wandsworth Environment and 
Sustainability Strategy capital budget of £5 million to commit to the 
schemes as detailed in paragraph 76. 
e) Approve one -off general fun d revenue budget variations of £ 78,000 in 
2020/21, £ 358,000 in 2021/22 , £71,000 in 2022/23 , and £30,000 in 
2023/24 to fund schemes as detailed in paragraph 78. 
 
 
The Wandsworth Environment and Sustainability Strategy and Action Plan  
 
4. On 17th July 2019, Wandsworth Council declared a Climate Emergency, 
resolving to be carbon neutral as an organisation by 2030, carbon zero by 2050 
and the greenest inner -London council by 2030.  
 
5. Recognising the need for urgency, at the same time as declaring a climate 
change emergency, the Council also set out its roadmap to achieve this vision 
in the Wandsworth Environmental and Sustainability Strategy (WESS). In 
January 2020, the Finance and Cor porate Resources OSC and the Executive 
approved an annual action plan which set out a series of ambitious actions to 
deliver the WESS.  
 Wandsworth Environment and Sustainability Strategy 
(WESS) Action Plan Update   
Page 3 of 19 
(Paper No. 21 -61) Official  
6. The Wandsworth Environment and Sustainability Strategy (WESS) sets out the 
vision for the borough, the challenges face d, and the actions to be taken to 
address these challenges over the short, medium and long term. The WESS 
Action Plan sets out in more detail the specific actions that will be delivered . By 
implementing the Strategy, Wandsworth will improve the overall sust ainability of 
the Borough, improve the health and wellbeing of residents, as well as reducing 
future costs.  
 
7. The WESS highlights the approach to becoming carbon neutral as an 
organisation, balancing the carbon emissions made  with ‘offsetting’ activities 
such as planting trees and new technologies such as carbon capture . This will 
result in a ‘neutral’ impact on the climate by not putting more carbon dioxide 
and other greenhouse gases into the atmosphere than is taken  out. This will be 
done by reducing carbon emissions as much as possible  through reducing the 
energy use d, making sure the energy that is used comes from low and zero 
carbon sources, creating as little waste as possible and making sure that when 
the Council spen ds money on services and products that they are sustainable 
and low carbon.  
 
8. The Council will promote and enhance its community leadership role, through 
working with residents, businesses and partners. The Council  will engage with 
residents  and ensure that  all ages and groups across the borough are included 
in the delivery of the strategy. This community leadership approach will be 
more than just information sharing, it will promote positive behaviour change 
that has meaningful and lasting impacts and suppo rt residents with real 
resource and funding. This will include working with key partners such as TfL, 
public sector bodies and schools to implement change in the Borough and 
support residents to make positive changes.  
 
9. The Council committed not only to deliver the WESS but to also report annually 
on progress and produce an annual action plan. This commitment means that 
residents are able to see the actions that have been delivered and are clear on 
next steps to becoming carbon neutral by 2030. In July 2020 an update paper 
was taken to the former Finance and Corporate Resources OSC which 
highlighted what had been delivered in the first 5 months of 2020 in relation to 
climate change. This demonstrated  to residents and counc illors that work to 
progress Wandsworth’s climate change ambitions was being taken forward and 
remained an area of focus . This paper provides a  further update on the actions 
delivered throughout 2020 . 
 
10. This paper  updates the action plan, setting out priority  actions that will be 
deliver ed in 2021 and beyond.  
 
What has been  delivered in 2020  
 
11. The events of 2020 posed a challenge in the delivery of Wandsworth’s climate 
change ambitions. In addition to the existing climate emergency, a new and 
more immediate emergency presented itself in the form of COVID -19. This has 
meant that staff across the Council have needed to change the way they work 
and concentrate  on he lping the people of Wandsworth protect themselves from Wandsworth Environment and Sustainability Strategy 
(WESS) Action Plan Update   
Page 4 of 19 
(Paper No. 21 -61) Official  
the virus and deal with the changes that have taken place to the everyone’s 
way of life.  
 
12. Throughout 2020 the Council has, however,  maintained its focus on tackling 
climate change . Some of the key achievements in 2020 are set out below, and 
more details on the actions delivered are contained in Appendix A.  
 
Becoming a carbon neut ral organisation by 2030   
 
13. In 2020 four new members of staff were recruited  who are dedicated to taking 
climate change action forward. These are two Climate Change Policy and 
Programme Leads, a Climate Change Communications Officer and a Climate 
Change Engagement Lead. The Council  now ha s a core, dedicated , Climate 
Change Team man aged by the Policy and Review Manager, who is also 
dedicat ing 50% of his time to climate change work. This additional resource  has 
given the organisation  capacity to drive forward actions and was instrumental in 
the delivery of the Climate Summit. Whilst c olleagues in the wider Policy, 
Performance and Analytics Division were seconded to C OVID -19 related work 
this team was ringfen ced to ensure that climate actions were delivered in 2020.  
 
14. This team works alongside dedicated officers across the Council who are taking 
forward climate change actions. This includes the Energy and Sustainabilit y 
Coordinator in  Propert y Services, the Transport Strategy Team  and the 
Planning Policy and Design  Team . This capacity remains for 2021 and has 
enabled the Council to keep up its momentum on delivering climate change.  
 
15. Embedding climate change across the Council is important in driving whole 
organisation change, and Wandsworth has continued to do this throughout 
2020. The Climate Change Steering Group has been key to this, bringing 
together Assistant Directors from across the organisation to work jointly in 
developing and progressing actions on climate change.  
 
16. Vehicles are one of the Council’s  sources  of Scope 1 carbon emissions, to 
reduce these emissions Wandsworth agreed at the S trategic Planning and 
Transport OSC meeting on 2 November  2020  (Paper 20 -336) to replace the 
existing fleet of 32 commercial heavy -duty vehicles with 28 replacements that 
produce lower emissions.  Some of the se new vehicles will be electric and 
others will be hybrids. A number of the  more  eco-friendly  vans and trucks will 
be purchased outright while others will be procured on short term lease 
agreements so they can be replaced with more environmentally friendly 
equivalents when vehicle technology improves . 
 
17. All of the electricity the organisation uses  is now from zero carbon sources such 
as solar panels and wind farms. This was put into place with a new contract 
which started in October 2020 and will see a significant reduction in carbon 
emissions. The Council has also commissioned and started work in d elivering  
energy audits of buildings . Once  complete , the energy  audits will be used to 
develop the Decarbonisation Str ategy which will se t out how the Council  will 
reduce carbon emissions from building s. Wandsworth successfully bid for £125 
000 from the Low Carbon Skills Fund, which will allow progress ion in the Wandsworth Environment and Sustainability Strategy 
(WESS) Action Plan Update   
Page 5 of 19 
(Paper No. 21 -61) Official  
analysis to develop a Decarbonisation Strategy for council  buildings . This will 
then form the basis for bids to the Public Sector Decarbonisation Fund , 
providing funding to reduce organisational e missions.  
 
18. Over the last 18 months the Joint Pensions Committee has invested 
considerable time and effort in considering its approach to Environmental, 
Social and Governance (ESG) issues which includes receiving training, 
benchmarking Manager’s ESG ratings, conducting carbon footprint analysis 
and undertaking climate scenario reviews based on 2°, 3°, and 4°C warming. 
These culminated in a fundamental review of the portfolio and the Committee 
decided to adopt a policy to progressively decarbonise its investments (as 
measured by the Weighted Average Carbon Intensity) portfolio, starting with the 
listed equity mandates. Further the Fund will look for investment opportunities 
which are expected to outperform in a 2°C scenario.  
 
19. To minimise the environment al impact from the money the Council  spend s on 
goods and services, social value has been introduced into procurement. This 
will improve the way the Council  procure s goods and service s and mak e sure it 
is done in a more environmentally friendly way, enablin g contractors and 
suppliers to minimise their environmental impact.  
 
20. The Council’s  waste and recycling approach for operational buildings  has been 
improved , an Office Waste Strategy  was developed, alongside a plan to 
minimise single use plastics across Council buildings.  
 
Reducing the borough’s emi ssions and preparing for climate change  
 
21. In response to requests from residents, Wandsworth committed to holding a 
climate summit for residents in November 2020. The Council delivered on this 
commitment, despite challenging circumstances. The first ever Wandsworth 
Climate Summit was held in November 2020, which attracted more than 650 
residents a cross  13 events.  The aim of this event was to raise awareness of 
climate change amongst residents and encourage and inspire them to make 
changes to help the borough tackle climate change. The Climate Summit 
included  high profile national and London groups such as  Carbon Trust and 
London Waste and Recycling Board, as well as a host of loc al groups and 
organisations including CREW, Greening the Grid, Parents for Future South 
West London  and Transition Tooting.  Feedback from the event found that 
before the event, 48% of attendees felt they knew a lot or a fair amount about 
the Council’s actions on climate change. This increased to 80% of attendees 
after the event.     
 
22. The Climate Summit was delivered wholly online due to COVID -19 restrictions 
and was done in  partnership with local groups, who shared their knowledge, 
expertise and enthusiasm with attendees.  Wandsworth was the only local 
authority  in London to run an event of this scale during COVID -19 and one of 
only three  nationally who have run large scale climate related events such as 
these in the past year.  
 Wandsworth Environment and Sustainability Strategy 
(WESS) Action Plan Update   
Page 6 of 19 
(Paper No. 21 -61) Official  
23. Wandsworth Youth Council led a Climate Commission in February 2020  with 
officers supporting the running of the event ; and members and officers sat on 
the Youth Cou ncil Climate Question Time panel  in November. A Youth4Climate 
competition was held over the summer, with the winner chosen by a panel 
including the CEO of Battersea Arts Centre, the founder of  Plogolution  and Cllr 
Calland as Chair of the FRCSOSC.   
 
24. Recognising the importance that talking about climate change has, and the 
need to ensure that information is provided to residents, there was an i ncrease  
in the amount of climate change related communications carried out throughout 
the year to keep residents informed on what the council  is doing and what they 
can do. This include d a “Love to Garden” campaign, which highlight ed the 
positive benefits of maintain ing gardens, and the launch of a climate change e -
newsletter.  
 
25. £500 ,000 of funding from central government was secured to improve the 
energy efficiency of people’s homes  through the Green Homes Grant Local 
Authority Delivery Scheme . Wandsworth was one of only 56 local authorities 
across England to successfully bid for funding. The Council is working with a 
Wandsworth based retrofit provider, RetrofitWorks, to deliver retrofit to 75 
homes across the borough . This funding is targeted at homes that are low 
income and have poor Energy Performance  Certificate ratings  so are either in 
or close to fuel poverty. The works will provide insulation, energy efficiency 
improvements and low carbon heating, reducing carbon emissions, making 
homes warmer and reducing fuel bills for those that most need it.   
 
26. A paper was reported  to the Housing and Regeneration OSC meeting in  
September 2020 which set out what the Council  will do to improve 
Wandsworth’s  social housing and reduce carbon emissions. This includes 
commissioning a stock condition survey to identify potential opportunities for 
energy efficiency improvements, identifying projects and programmes to 
support through the capital programme which will have a carbon reduction 
benefit and setting targets for t he next 10 years. Wandsworth aims to exceed 
the 35% C O2 reduction requirements on the Council’s 1000 new homes 
development programme  and produce an energy strategy for each housing 
development providing a full assessment of the benefits and viability of 
utilisation of cleaner and green technologies.  The Green Homes Grant funding 
from central government includes a full suite of retrofit works to four tenanted 
properties including the installation of solar PVs, LED lighting and upgraded 
heating  and heating controls. These works, which are underway, will improve 
the energy efficiency of these houses, raising the EPC ratings to C, and will act 
as a pilot to demonstrate the benefits of retrofit improvements for residents.   
 
27. Wandsworth’s draft Local Plan prioritises ambitious climate change mitigation 
and adaptation policies and ensures green infrastructure is integrated in 
development with clear commitments to placemaking that makes the public 
realm healthier for people and the environmen t. The draft Local Plan provides 
spaces that are resilient to climate change and protects the most vulnerable, 
embracing 15 -minute neighbourhoods and taking forward recommendations Wandsworth Environment and Sustainability Strategy 
(WESS) Action Plan Update   
Page 7 of 19 
(Paper No. 21 -61) Official  
from the 2020 Strategic Flood Risk Assessment. The Local Plan is open for 
consultation now, with the consultation closing on 1 st March.  
 
28. The Council  received £55,000 funding from the Department for Transport for 13 
ecargo bikes for use by two council team s (the parks police and the 
enforcement team) , three charities (Share Nurser ies, Elays Network and Waste 
Not Want Not Battersea) and local businesses (including Battersea wine bar, 
The Humble Grape, Putney sports shop, The Crewroom , gardening and 
handyperson company Osman O’Connor & Co, as well as  the Putney Business 
Improvement District Positively Putney). The businesses own the bikes and are 
using them to replace journeys they would normally be made by car or van, 
such as ‘last mi le’ deliveries or collections.  
 
29. Bike hangars have been installed in 21 streets , which is in addition to the 40 
already in place on local estates. Cycle corridors are being rolled out as part of 
work to prioritise sustainable travel, including in major str ategic routes along 
Garratt Lane and Queenstown Road, and the Council  established the Healthy 
Streets Forum bringing together councillors, officers and the community to help 
ensure that the streets of Wandsworth are as clean and environmentally 
healthy as they can possibly be.  Wandsworth now has the third highest number 
of School Streets in inner London – with 20 in place to date. School Streets 
reduce traffic caused by the school run and support social distancing measures 
outside the school gates, as well as helping improve the air quality around 
schools.   
 
30. Wandsworth also continues to have the highest number of publicly available EV 
charging points of any local authority in the country (560). By April 
2021  another 200 lamppost  sockets are set to come on stream , with more 
charging points to be added during the rest of 2021.  Areas of Shaftesbury Ward 
in Battersea and Thamesfield Ward in Putney have  been part of a pilot which 
has seen a huge increase in EV charging points, with multiple chargers on most 
streets, bringing to life what the  future of electric transport may look like.  All 
feasible lamp columns in both defined areas now have sockets installed with 
116 in the Shaftesbury area scheme and 29 in Thamesfield . 
 
31. Whilst charging infrastructure to support the transition to electric vehicles  has 
been built , there has been the  continue d promot ion of  the use of shared, 
electric mobility through the car clubs in the borough. At the end of 2020, more 
than 38,000 residents were members o f a car club, a year -on-year increase of 
30%. Whilst the number of vehicles available from car club bays (“back -to-
base” operation) declined slightly in 2020 due to difficult operating conditions 
during the pandemic, proposals for new contracts to stimulat e growth in back -
to-base operation are planned for later in 2021. The increase in overall 
membership is predominantly due to continued operation of the free -floating car 
club Zipcar Flex throughout the borough.  
 
32. In response to the COVID -19 pandemic and the Council’s  aim to support local 
economies, the  drive to shop local realised the co -benefits to the local economy 
of actions taken in the borough to help cut carbon emissions on streets and 
reduce exposure to air pollution in busy areas . There was the successful Wandsworth Environment and Sustainability Strategy 
(WESS) Action Plan Update   
Page 8 of 19 
(Paper No. 21 -61) Official  
introduc tion of  town centre pedestrianisation schemes, with businesses un -
furloughing staff and reporting that the schemes had essentially s topped them 
from going out of business in 2020 as new visitors came to support local trade.  
 
33. Parks across Wandsworth have been recognised as being award winning, with 
an increase in the number of Green Flags awarded to parks from two in 2019 to 
five in 2020. A draft Biodiversity Strategy  has been developed , which is being 
discussed at the C ommunity  Services and Open Spaces OSC  in February 
2021. The Council has announced  £100,000 spending on new trees over the 
next two years.  As laid out in the first WESS A ction Plan, 540 trees  were 
planted  by April  2020,  with 80 trees  given  to community organisations to plant 
on their own land. 
 
External validation of Wandsworth’s  climate approach  
 
34. A study by UCL published in September 2020 looked at the challenges and 
opportunities for local authorities in the context of climate emergency action 
planning. The study found that Wandsworth Council was rated highly in its 
administrative capacity to lowe r carbon emissions, only one of four local 
authorities that specified the co -benefits of climate actions, and were rated third 
best out of the 33 authorities in terms of climate action planning. Wandsworth 
was also specifically highlighted by the Managing Director of Climate 
Emergency UK in a report by the Local Government Chronicle as an example 
of a local authority that is doing a lot on climate change.  
 
35. In the 2020 WESS Action Plan, there was a commitment to seeking external 
validation of the Council’s  approach. In 2020 , Wandsworth t ook part in the 
Carbon Disclosure Project  (CDP) , an internationally recognised body for 
assessing cities and companies’ climate action approaches, for the first time.  
Wandsworth  was one of only 33 local authorities to participate in CDP.  This 
tested the WESS and action plan against what other places are doing across 
the world , with Wandsworth receiving  a B grade . A B grade  is highly regarded , 
especially  on first submission to CDP . It shows  Wandsworth has solid plans in 
place, is making progress on its climate goals and ha s a framework in place to 
deliver action on climate change.  CDP noted  that Wandsworth  produce s a 
borough -wide emissions inventory, that Wandsworth  understand s, report s and 
is taking action on climate risks and vulnerability in the borough, is 
incorporating specific sustainability goals into mainstream borough -wide 
planning and ha s an action plan in place to reduce carbon emissions . 
 
 
Wandsworth’s Carbon Emissions  
 
Council emissions  
 
36. It is important for the Council  to measure its carbon emissions in order to show 
what they are, where they come from and how the Council plans to reduce 
them and become carbon neutral by 2030.  
 
 Wandsworth Environment and Sustainability Strategy 
(WESS) Action Plan Update   
Page 9 of 19 
(Paper No. 21 -61) Official  
37. Carbon emi ssions are organised into three groups or 'scopes':  
 
• Scope 1 (Direct emissions): Activities owned , controlled or paid for by the 
Council that release emissions straight into the atmosphere. They are direct 
emissions and include combustion in gas boilers own ed or control led by the 
Council, or from petrol and diesel fuelled vehicles.  
• Scope 2 (Energy indirect): Emissions released into the atmosphere 
associated with use of electricity, heat, steam and cooling. These are indirect 
emissions that are a r esult of Council  activities, but which happen at sources 
that are not owned or controlled  by the Council , such as power stations.  
• Scope 3 (Other indirect): Emissions that are a consequence of Council  
actions, which occur at sources that are not owned or co ntrolled by the 
Council and not classed as scope 2 emissions. These include business 
travel by means not owned or controlled by the organisation, waste disposal, 
or purchased materials or fuels.  
 
38. Wandsworth currently measure s its Scope 1 and 2 emissions, b ut do es not 
currently measure Scope 3 emissions. These are much more difficult to 
measure as these emissions are tied to services and products purchase d from 
other companies and organisations, who often don’t record and measure their 
carbon emissions.  
 
39. Work on Scope 3 emissions measurement is being led on a national level by 
Local Partnerships (a  joint venture owned by the LGA, the Treasury and the 
Welsh Government ), who have developed a Scope 1 and 2 emissions 
calculation framework for all local authori ties to use. W andsworth is using this 
for Scope 1 and 2 emissions calculations. Local Partnerships are developing a 
Scope 3 emissions approach for all L ocal Authoritie s so there is a consistent 
methodology and approach  to Scope 3 emissions . In addition, London Councils 
has a project that will produce recommendations for a shared borough 
approach to carbon emissions accounting, including an agreed methodology for 
Scope 3 emissions. This is scheduled to be completed by July 2021. The 
intention is that these will either feed into the Local Partnerships work or will be 
progressed by London Boroughs. Wandsworth officers are in regular contact 
with London Councils on this area of work  and are involved in one of the 
subgroups working on this . 
 
40. Alongs ide the new contract which commenced in October 2020 under which 
the council purchases zero carbon  electricity, the framework provider, LASER, 
became responsible for capturing and monitoring energy usage and emissions 
from grid electricity and gas use. As part of their initial work, LASER have been 
reviewing previous records to identify any readings that are missing and to 
ensure the data from the current and previous years is calculated in a 
consistent way. This exercise has been completed for 2019/20 and will be 
completed for 2017/18 and 2018/19 as well. This means there may be small 
changes to the emissions data presented below as data analysts from the 
council and LASER review the full dataset . 
 
41. Wandsworth’s Scope 1 and 2 carbon emissions for 2017/18, 2018/19 and 
2019/20 are presented below:   Wandsworth Environment and Sustainability Strategy 
(WESS) Action Plan Update   
Page 10 of 19 
(Paper No. 21 -61) Official  
 
Wandsworth 
Carbon 
Emissions 
(tCO2e)  2017/18  2018/19  2019/20   
Scope 1 (Gas 
and vehicle 
and plant 
fuel)  14,743.69  14,532.16  13,130.10   
Scope 2 
(Electricity)  11,969.00  8,898.37  7,875.00   
Total Carbon 
Emissions  26,712.69  23,430.53  21,005.34   
 
 
42. The figures show an overall decrease in emissions of 10.36 % from 2018/19 to 
2019/20 and a decrease of 21.74 % from 2017/18 to 2019/20. The decrease in 
Scope 1 emissions is due to an overall decrease primarily in gas consumption .  
 
43. As part of the forthcoming Decarbonisation Strategy  (see paragraph 5 3 below) , 
Council buildings are being ranked by efficiency levels and prioritised for 
energy efficiency improvements  and retrofits according to that ranking , with the 
feasibility studies funded by the Low Carbon S kills Fund. This will include 
switching fro m gas heating to low carbon heating such as heat pumps , leading 
to a reduction in Scope 1 emissions.  
 
44. As the vehicle fleet is predominantly powered by combustion engines, fuel 
consumption over the years 2017/18 – 2019/20 has remained fairly steady. 
There is a continued shift from diesel to petrol vehicles, which reduces the 
emissions of gases and particula tes that contribute to air pollution, including 
nitrogen dioxide and PM2.5, but does not reduce carbon emissions 
significantly. The Council is developing  a plan for transitioning its fleet to zero 
emission vehicles, which is due later this year , with work already underway on 
this as highlighted in pa ragraph 1 6 of this report . It is expected that there will be 
substantial Scope 1 emissions reductions  over time as the fleet is replaced by 
electric or other zero emission vehicles.   
 
45. The decrease in Scope 2 emissions is due to ongoing energy efficiency 
measures being introduced across the corporate estate, as well as the year on 
year reduction in CO2 emissions associated with electricity as the national grid 
gradually decarbonises. In addition, Wandsworth generated 120,313.00 kwh of 
solar power in 2017/18, saving 42.28 tCO2e, 161,581 kwh of solar power in 
2018/19, saving 45.26 tCO2e and 165,626 kwh of solar power in 2019/20, 
saving 42.33 tCO2e . Whilst electricity usage is expected to in crease as the 
heating of the Council’s operational building s and fleet are electrified, because 
of the purchas e of zero carbon electricity  overall emissions will continue to 
reduce as there is a  shift from gas to electricity. In addition, it is expected that Wandsworth Environment and Sustainability Strategy 
(WESS) Action Plan Update   
Page 11 of 19 
(Paper No. 21 -61) Official  
there will be the introduction of more on -site renewable generation for power 
and heat, further details of which will be outlined in the Decarbonisation 
Strategy.  
 
Borough -wide  emissions  
 
46. As well as measuring the carbon emissions the Council makes as an 
organisation , it is also important for the Co uncil to be aware of the carbon 
footprint of the borough as a whole.  The UK Government has set a target of the 
UK becoming net zero by 2050. Wand sworth is committed to doing its part in 
contributing to the achievement of this target.  
 
47. Official data from the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy 
(BEIS) provides a reliable long -term measurement of some of the borough’s  
emissions. Collection of this data started in 2005 and is updated annually . The 
data collected provides a picture of Scope 1 and 2 emissions for the borough, 
although it does not include emissions linked to aviation  or from waste or the 
products residents  buy and con sume.   
 
48. The latest published  BEIS data shows that carbon emissions from the borough 
as whole have reduced from 1 478.9 kilotons of CO2 (ktCO2) in 2005 to 858.0 
ktCO2 in 2018, a reduction of 4 2%. When looking at per capita emissions (the 
amount of CO2 per person in the borough) Wandsworth  has gone from 5. 2 tons 
per person in 2005 to 2.6 tons per person in 2018, a reduction of 4 9.7%. The 
majority of these emission reductions have come from electr icity usage (6 2.1% 
of total reductions since 2005), which is linked to the decarbonisation of the 
electricity grid and the shift to renewable energy generation nationally.  
 
49. Just under h alf of total borough emissions ( 47.8%) come from domestic 
sources, whic h means the electricity and gas use d in homes, with 2 8% coming 
from industry and commerce and 2 4.2% coming from transport. Of domestic 
carbon emissions, nearly three quarters (7 1%) comes from gas use d for 
heating and cooking, which highlights the importance in improving the energy 
efficiency of homes in the borough and moving from using gas to heat homes.   
 
50. Boroughwide data demonstrates the importance of working with residents  and 
local businesses to ensure they are aware of the steps they can take to reduce 
their carbon emissions and are supported to take action . In 2020 Wandsworth 
made progress in this area by securing Green Homes Grant funding , holding 
the Climate Summit , which included a session on greening your home  and a 
session with the Chamber of Commerce , and ongoing communication and 
engagement actions.  Supporting the borough as a whole to reduce emissi ons is 
an area of on -going focus for the 2021 WESS Action Plan . 
 
2021 WESS AC TION PLAN  
 
51. While Wandsworth has made significant progress in delivery of the WESS and 
its action plan in 2020 , in very challenging circumstances , there is a lot more 
that needs to be done to deliver on the commitments made.  The Council’s  
target of being carbon neutral as an organisation by 2030 requires the Wandsworth Environment and Sustainability Strategy 
(WESS) Action Plan Update   
Page 12 of 19 
(Paper No. 21 -61) Official  
organisation to step up its actions, and the Council is aware  of the need to 
support and encourage residents to  reduc e their cl imate impact. Officers have 
reviewed the action plan and identified new areas to work on, as well as 
additional actions in existing areas of work. Key actions are set out  below, but 
the full action plan with more detail on what will be deliver ed and by whe n is 
included in Appendix B.  
 
Becoming a carbon neutral organisation by 2030  
 
52. As set out in the organisational emissions  data in paragraphs 3 6 to 45, Scope 1 
and 2 emissions occur from the buildings and vehicles the Council operate s. 
Developing robust and clear plans to reduce these emissions is key to being 
able to plot a course to achieve carbon neutrality for the organisatio n by 2030  
and to priorit ise the actions that will deliver the carbon reductions needed . 
 
53. A Decarbonisation Strategy is being developed for operational buildings, which 
will develop more detailed plans to decarbonise heat . As hig hlighted in 
paragraph 17, in 2020 energy audits and feasibility studies were started for the 
corporate estate , and th e strategy will take forward recommendations from this 
work. The Decarbonisation Strat egy will allow the prioritisation  of action s and 
intervention , targeting the highest carbon emitting buildings so carbon 
reductions can be made as quickly and effectively  as possible.  It will  allow 
better measurement of carbon emission s reduction  and enab le a clear path to 
be set out for emissions re ductions fr om buildings, as well as supporting bids 
for external funding when it becomes available  and set out in more detail how 
emissions  reductions  from buildings  will be achieved . The Decarbonisation 
Strategy will be presented to the Financ e, Resources and Climate Sustainability 
OSC  in July 2021.  
 
54. Ahead of the expansion of the Ultra -Low Emission Zone to the inside of the 
South Circular, the Council  will develop plans for moving to zero emission 
vehicles across its entire vehicle fleet. Implementing this plan an d switching to 
zero emission vehicles will reduce Scope 1 carbon emissions associated with 
vehicle use  and allow the tracking of those reductions.   
 
55. The development of these plans will enable the Council  to produce a  detailed 
emissions pathway analysis , which will set out the quantifiable carbon emission 
reductions that can be achieved year on year . This will set clear e missions 
reductions targets for the highest areas of Scope 1 and 2 emissions , enabling  
progress tracking towards the goal of becoming carbon neutral by 2030 . The 
2021 WESS Action Plan commits to  this work being completed by December 
2021, allowing the Decarbonisation Strategy and zero emissions vehicles plan 
to be incorporated . The Scope 3 emissions work detailed in paragraph 39 will 
allow measure ment of Scope 3 emissions and then plan in detail how and when 
these emissions will be reduced.   
 
56. Carbon Literacy training  for staff will be launched , which will provide the 
knowledge that staff need on what climate change is and how to take action  to 
reduce carbo n emissions . This training has been developed in -house and will 
be scalable as more and more people become Carbon Literate in the Wandsworth Environment and Sustainability Strategy 
(WESS) Action Plan Update   
Page 13 of 19 
(Paper No. 21 -61) Official  
organisation. Staff involved in the development of the training are Carbon 
Literate and have been trained in how to deliver cl imate -based training online 
and in -person. There has been engagement with The Carbon Literacy Project, 
who first developed this approach, and they are enthused by the innovative 
approach to Carbon Literacy training. A staff Climate Change network  will be 
launched , which will encourage sustainable choices among staff and run a live 
staff event on Climate Change.  
 
57. Key IT infrastructure will be moved to the cloud to reduce associated carbon 
emissions. IT infrastructure uses a significant amount of electricity and will form 
a part of Scope 3 emissions. Microsoft Cloud computing aims to be carbon 
negative by 2030 , meaning that Scope 3 emissions associated with IT will be 
significantly reduced.  
 
Reducing the borough’s emiss ions and preparing for climate change  
 
Planning for the future  
 
58. Wandsworth’s Local Plan is a key priority for the Council and the new draft 
Local Plan places greater emphasis on placemaking  and design  that prioritises  
health and wellbeing and climate change . Public c onsultation on the draft Local 
Plan has started, inviting comments  from a range of stakeholders  across the 
borough  until 1 March 2021 . An updated draft incorporat ing that feedback will 
be published in Autumn 2021.  
 
59. Once the Environment Bill receives royal assent and guidance is published, 
Biodiversity Net Gain will be  embedded into planning processes.  
 
Biodiversity  
 
60. A refreshed tree strategy will be produced by September 2021 which will sit 
alongside the new Biodiversity Strategy. This tree strategy will provide a clear 
long-term approach on tree planting policy  and the management and support 
required to deliver the ambitions of the WESS . Not only will this outline the 
many benefits associated with trees,  including environmental, health, wellbeing 
and economic, but it will also  inform future contract specifications  and 
requirements . The extensive tree planting programme will continue with a 
further 600 trees planted by April 2022 and the completion of the ambition 
(outlined at this Committee last year) to plant 1,000 new street trees. New trees 
will be helped to become established and take root through the use of 750 tree 
gators  installed on all new trees planted across the borough . 
 
61. As well as maintaining parks and green spaces , the Council will raise 
awareness and promote behaviour change amongst residents around 
importance of biodiversity and actions that can be taken to done to promote 
and protect it.  
 
 
 
 Wandsworth Environment and Sustainability Strategy 
(WESS) Action Plan Update   
Page 14 of 19 
(Paper No. 21 -61) Official  
Green Economy  
 
62. Action around supporting and promoting the green economy  have been added 
into the action plan , includ ing establish ing what green jobs exist currently in the 
borough, forecasting  what future demand will be and seek funding to support 
the development of green jobs. The Council will work with local providers, 
including South Thames College, to develop new courses that provi de the skills 
needed for local residents to thrive in the developing green economy.  
 
63. Further action s around the green economy include work ing with key businesses 
and groups in the borough, including the Chamber of Commerce, to share 
information and practical guidance on how local businesses can take 
advantage of the opportunities of the green economy and showcas ing green 
local businesses through a g reen awards category in the annual Chamber of 
Commerce business awards.   
 
Healthy Streets and Air Quality  
 
64. A new 2030 network vision , the Walking and Cycling Strategy , has been 
developed and is being presented  to the February meeting of the Strategic 
Planning and Transportation OSC . This p rioritises active travel and other 
sustainable forms of travel  and would replace the current Cycling Strategy , 
incorporating  plans for improving the public realm . This will provide a closer link 
to the borough’s wider transport strategy, the Local Implementation Plan  using 
a ‘Healthy Streets’ approach to street design . The Strategy will be developed in 
consultation and engageme nt with interested stakeholders, reflecting the 
Council’s approach to full consultation and committee discussion around major 
traffic management schemes. Measures that promote sustainable transport will 
continue to be put in place, including:  
 
• Investigate the feasibility of further pedestrian and cycle -friendly schemes, 
building on the success of the town centre pedestrianisation programme.  
• Complete and roll-out further sustainable travel routes and schemes 
including in Nine Elms and Queenstown Road with a consultation for a 
permanent scheme plann ed for Summer 2021 and construction pencilled 
in to commence by Q 1 2022/23 . On Garratt Lane, the second Northbound 
cycling corridor is due to be implemented by the end of the financial year  
and the design for permanent measure to prioritise sustainable modes of 
transport will start in autumn 2021.    
• Installing new contraflow lanes  
• Make provision for cargo bikes parking  
 
65. The integrated approach Wandsworth is taking on climate and air pollution will 
be cemented in a new Air Quality Action Plan for public consultation during 
2021. Wandsworth  will achieve a net increase in the number of trees within 
regeneration areas at Winstanley and York Road and the Alton Estate.  
 
66. Wandsworth’s opposition to Heathrow expansion and work with other councils, 
Greenpeace and the Mayor of London will continue, draw ing attention to the 
significant impacts any expansion will have on residents’ lives.  Wandsworth Environment and Sustainability Strategy 
(WESS) Action Plan Update   
Page 15 of 19 
(Paper No. 21 -61) Official  
 
67. Accelerating the take up of sustainable forms of transport  where journeys 
cannot be made by active travel  is essential for reducing both climate and air 
pollution in the borough. Capital funding and climate change funding, if 
approved, will be used to deliver additional electric vehicle charging capacity in 
2021/22, with numbers to be determined and subject to successful bids to the 
government Office for Zero Emission Vehicles to bo ost this spending power. 
These may not necessarily be lamp columns and could deliver a smaller 
number of faster chargers to provide more overall capacity, focusing on provide 
a mix of some sockets in areas where demand is high and some in areas 
where there  are big gaps.  Demand for charging infrastructure will be assessed 
and plan s developed  for further roll -out for residents and visitors, which 
assesses relative need for on -street, destination and rapid charging. More than 
1,500 requests for lamp column cha rging have been received across the 
borough and future rollout is likely to be based on a mixture of high -demand 
areas and filling in gaps.  
 
68. An Innovate UK funded project is already underway, which includes an 
additional 24 on -street residential chargepoin ts scheduled to be installed in Q1 
2021/22, providing 46 sockets at 13 separate sites. Another estimated 20 on -
street residential chargepoints across 10 sites will be included in the planning 
for Q2 2021/22 with site selection focused on filling the gaps i n wards that have 
lower levels of provision, as mentioned above. Wandsworth Council secured 
£88,250 grant funding as one of the consortium participants along with other 
organisations including other local authorities, Virgin Media, Loughborough 
University.  The aim of this project is to leverage the existing power and 
communications infrastructure of Virgin Media which includes pre -existing ducts 
and grid connections around the UK which will provide the foundation upon 
which a variety of operators can instal l their chargepoints.  
 
69. In addition to building charging infrastructure to support the transition to electric 
vehicles, there will be continued promot ion of shared, electric mobility through 
the car clubs in the borough. Already around 25% of Zipcar Flex v ehicles are 
fully electric, but to boost the proportion of pure EVs in the fleet, a new contract 
with Zipcar through to May 2023  has been agreed , which includes a discounted 
rate for EVs to incentivise deployment. Zipcar has ambitions to make the Flex 
fleet fully electric by 2025, so it is expected that more users each year able to 
take advantage of driving cars that are free from tailpipe emissions.  
 
Improving energy efficiency in homes  
 
70. Delivery of Green Homes Grant Local Authority Delivery Scheme  will continue , 
and bid s will be developed  for any future funding that becomes available to help 
make residents’ homes more energy efficient and generate their own 
renewable electricity and/or heat.  
 
71. The Council will commission a stock condition survey to  provide accurate 
baseline data on the condition of housing stock and identify potential 
opportunities for energy efficiency improvements to help tackle fuel poverty. 
The Social Housing Technical Assistance pilot will provide the Housing and Wandsworth Environment and Sustainability Strategy 
(WESS) Action Plan Update   
Page 16 of 19 
(Paper No. 21 -61) Official  
Regeneration D epartment with a full assessment of its 16,000 tenanted housing 
stock and a plan to improve the energy efficiency of this to EPC C plus a 
pathway to net zero. The Council will improve the energy efficiency of council 
housing stock and estates by moving to LED lighting where appropriate, 
delivering a programme of roof and window renewals and e xploring options to 
install new technologies to improve energy efficiency in council owned housing 
blocks such as ground/air source heat pumps . Further research will be 
undertaken into potential green funding streams and bids for funds will be made 
as appropriate, such as for the Social Housing Decarbonisation Fund. External 
funding will support the implementation of energy efficiency measures.  
 
Reducing waste  
 
72. Ahead of scoping  the next Waste & Recycling contract, a food waste collection 
trial service will launch and a composting trial via the free supply  of 100 home  
composting  containers  will also take place . A waste  minimisation  and recycling  
promotion  communications  campaign  will take place  to encourage  residents  to 
take action  on waste.  
 
Working with schools  
 
73. A resources hub for schools on climate change and sustainability  will be 
created , which will include both facilities management information and broader 
climate change/sustainability information  and collate and showcase actions 
taken by individual schools.  Schools will benefit from feasibility studies to 
assess which energy efficiency measures including deep retrofits are best 
suited to decarbonise school buildings  in the borough . 
 
Communication and engagement  
 
74. The success of the Wandsworth Climate Summit will be built upon , including 
the development of an engagement plan which will include more online 
engagement events on climate change and series of events at the same time 
as the COP26 summit that will be hosted  by the UK in November 2021.  A 
comprehensive communications plan will be delivered which will ensure 
residents are aware of the commitment the Council has made to taking action 
on climate change and of the actions they can take as residents to reduce 
emiss ions.  
 
DELIVERING THE WANDSWORTH ENVIRONMENT AND SUSTAINABILITY 
STRATEGY AND ACTION PLAN  
 
75. As noted in paragraph  13, over the last year the Council has increased capacity  
to deliver on climate change commitments . This has enabled  climate action 
delivery during lockdown periods and was instrumental in the delivery of the 
recent Wandsworth Climate Summit. This capacity remains and will allow  
further deliver y in the coming year.  
 
 Wandsworth Environment and Sustainability Strategy 
(WESS) Action Plan Update   
Page 17 of 19 
(Paper No. 21 -61) Official  
76. In January 2020 , the Finance and Corporate Resources OSC agreed to 
allocate £5 million to projects which directly support the delivery of the WESS  
(Paper 20-39). A series of bids have been submitted to utilise these funds to 
deliver projects that will accelerate  delivery of t he WESS .  An overview of these 
bids is set out below:  
 
Project  Bid Budget allocated  £ 
Wandsworth Bridge (cycle 
resurfacing)  50,000  
Electric Vehicle Charge Points  203,000  
Bike hangars  150,000  
Cycle Parking On Street  70,000  
School Streets  192,500  
School cycle parking  45,000  
E-cargo bike sustainable freight 
scheme  60,000  
 770,500  
 
77. The Finance , Resources and Climate Sustainability OSC is recomm ended to 
approve  the allocations to support these projects, as set out in 
Recommendation D of the report.  Appropriate profiling across the years has 
been provided in the capital paper (Paper 21 -64) elsewhere on the agenda for 
this meeting.  
 
78. In addition  to these capital projects , a series of additional bids for reve nue 
funding to support and accelerate  delivery of the WESS have been proposed. 
An overview of these bids is set out below : 
 
Bid Full Bid 
Amount  2020/21  2021/22  2022/23  2023/24  
Air Quality  148,000   148,000    
Intensive home 
composting  4,000  4,000     
Waste 
Behaviour 
Change 
Comm unications  50,000  20,000  30,000    
Food Waste 
Reduction Trial 105,000   50,000  25,000  30,000  Wandsworth Environment and Sustainability Strategy 
(WESS) Action Plan Update   
Page 18 of 19 
(Paper No. 21 -61) Official  
Waste 
Consultant  10,000   2,500  7,500   
Waste Support 
Officer  20,000   2,500  17,500   
Pedestrian 
Crossin g Study  25,000  25,000     
 
School Energy 
Audits  120,000  25,000  95,000    
Children’s Model 
UN 5,000   5,000    
Transport 
Strategy 
Programme Co-
ordinator  50,000 4,000 25,000 21,000   
Totals  £537,000 £78,000 £358,000 £71,000 £30,000  
 
79. It is recommended that the Finance, Resources and Climate Sustainability OSC 
approves these one -off budget variations, as set out in Recommendation (e) of 
this report.  
 
DIRECTOR OF RESOURCES COMMENT  
 
80. The WESS action plan in January 2020 approved specific annual revenue 
budget which funds the additional staffing resource outlined above.  The 
specific climate change bids received as outlined above have been added to 
the capital programme in a paper elsew here on this agenda.  A number of 
revenue bids are also recommended to be supported which will require positive 
general fund revenue budget variations of £ 78,000 in 2020/21, £ 358,000  in 
2021/22, £ 71,000 in 2022/23 and £30,000 in 2023/24 only.  These have b een 
incorporated within the Council tax setting paper (Paper 21-63) elsewhere on 
this agenda.  
 
EQUALITY IMPACT ASSESSMENT  
 
72. The Equality Act 2010 requires that the Council when exercising its functions 
must have "due regard" to the need to eliminate discrimination, to advance 
equality of opportunity between persons who share a relevant protected 
characteristic and persons who do not share it and to foster good relations 
between persons who share a relevant protected characteristic and person s 
who do not share it. An Equality Impact Needs Analysis (EINA) was completed 
as part of the Wandsworth Environment and Sustainability Strategy that was 
published in July 2019 and still applies to this paper and the  updated action Wandsworth Environment and Sustainability Strategy 
(WESS) Action Plan Update   
Page 19 of 19 
(Paper No. 21 -61) Official  
plan. Separate project an d service specific EINAs will be developed as 
individual projects are developed and taken for decision.  
 
SUPPORTING THE WANDSWORTH ENVIRONMENT AND SUSTAINABILITY 
STRATEGY (WESS)  
 
73. This paper provides an update on progress against delivery of the WESS and 
the previous action plan , provided at Appendix A . The paper also highlights  
further actions to be delivered in 2021 and beyond, with an updated WESS 
Action Plan for 2021 attached at  Append ix B which includes how Wandsworth 
will reduce its emissions and develop a pathway for further emissions 
reduction .  
 
CONCLUSION  
 
74. The initial development of the WESS and associated action plan has put 
Wandsworth  in a strong position  to take action on climate change . By 
developing a robust approach early, Wandsworth is ahead of many  other local 
authorities  in takin g the lead  on climate action . By securing delivery capacity , 
Wandsworth has been able t o continue its climate progress at a time when 
many other local authorities have had to divert resource away from it. Despite 
the challenges  of the pandemic, delivery of the WESS has remain ed and will 
continue  to remain a priority  for Wandsworth. The update d action plan sets the 
path to increase momentum and deliver further on our climate ambitions.  
______________  
 
The Town Hall,       PAUL MARTIN  
Wandsworth,        Chief Executive  
SW18 2PU.      
 
2nd February 2021 
 
 
Background papers  
There are no background papers to this report.  
All reports to Overview and Scrutiny Committees, regulatory and other committees, 
the Executive and the full Council can be viewed on the Council’s website 
(www.wandsworth.gov.uk/moderngov ) unless the report was published before May 
2001, in which case the democratic services officer can supply it if required.  