1Haringey Climate 
Change Action Plan 
A Route Map for a Net Zero Carbon 
Haringey
March 2021Haringey Climate Change Action Plan2Foreword
The significant community interest and engagement on this Action Plan has shown that 
there is high level of support from the community on tackling Climate Change. Nearly 
4 in 5 respondents said that they were very concerned about climate change and that 
action should be a priority for the borough. Climate Change is a risk to us all through 
heatwaves, energy costs rising and local flooding. We have demonstrated through the 
recent pandemic that as a community we can change for the better , and we can tackle 
emergencies together .
In the last year we as a Haringey community have had to deal with the COVID emergency. 
It has impacted us all with positives and negatives. It has shown how together we can 
address an emergency. In addressing this pandemic, the Council has had to alter the way 
it delivers services, we have seen the health and economic benefits of reductions in traffic 
on our roads, and the benefits from increasing numbers cycling. The community across 
the borough has also responded by growing community networks. Sharing knowledge, 
resource and developing projects that have brought us closer .
This Action Plan sets out how the Council will be a leader and how together we will deliver 
homes that are healthy, comfortable, and affordable places to heat and power . It sets out 
how as a community we can support our local businesses with low carbon buildings and 
purchasing local goods. The Plan enables us to all share the benefits of quiet and calm 
neighbourhoods with accessible and safe, low carbon travel options. The Plan also sets 
out how we can increase the amount of power generated in our borough through clean 
and green energy. Most importantly, the Plan sets out how we as a community will work 
together to address the Climate Emergency.
Since the draft Action Plan was launched a year ago, we have not stopped action on 
delivering carbon reduction projects. In the last year we have started our School Streets 
Programme, worked with local businesses on e-cargo bikes, and started the Homes for 
Haringey retrofit programmes. We are delivering policy documents such as the New Local 
Plan and the draft Walking and Cycling Action Plan. We launched web-based tools to help 
awareness and understanding of low carbon choices with the Ecofurb web page, and a 
Clean Car App to assess the options of electric vehicles.
Communities with low car ownership are blighted by the worst air quality, and their access 
to public transport and active travel options need to be improved. This has become worse 
when public transport capacity was reduced to support social distancing. In response, the 
Council is supporting new walking and cycling infrastructure so we can deliver better air 
quality and carbon reduction. Delivering healthier lifestyles and increased access to jobs 
and services are also key parts of the Action Plan. The Climate Change Action Plan will 
also support our work in addressing poor quality housing and the rising number of families 
in fuel poverty, again a situation that has been exacerbated during the pandemic. The 
Action Plan can deliver a win for the many.
For Haringey to become Net Zero Carbon, the Council, residents, visitors, stakeholders, 
local businesses, and government need to work together to deliver the Action Plan’s 
ambition. Combating climate change is a collective endeavour , and we will continue to 
work with colleagues across the sector to share knowledge so we can keep Haringey’s 
target date of 2041 – and if we can confidently bring it forward, we will.
Councillor Kirsten Hearn  
Cabinet Member for Climate Change, Equalities & Leisurwww.haringey.gov.uk/net-zero-carbon-haringey3Contents
Foreword      2
Contents      3
Introduction and Background    4
Haringey’s Action Plans    11
The Council      11
Housing      18
Non-Domestic Building and Workplace Emissions 25
T ransport      31
Energy       37
Community      42
National and Regional Lobbying   48
Delivering the Ambition    50
Glossary      53Haringey Climate Change Action Plan4Introduction and Background
OUR VISION FOR HARINGEY 
IN 2041
Our 2041 vision is for a Haringey that is healthy 
and sustainable, with walking or cycling to local 
amenities and taking the long-distance trains for 
holidays being the norm. Roads will have been 
repurposed to give way to street-side planting, 
play areas, dedicated charging areas for electric 
vehicles, with safe space to get to your destination 
by using any non-motorised set of wheels or 
by foot. The Council will have finished the deep 
retrofitting of all council-owned properties, 
resulting in lower energy bills and more control 
over thermal comfort at home and at work. All 
households will live in homes that are warm in 
the winter and cool in the summers; homes that 
are desirable, warm, and affordable to run. Local 
energy generation is widespread and usage can 
be tracked, increasing awareness. Photovoltaic 
(PV) solar panels power Council buildings, homes 
and businesses, and thousands of homes are 
connected to low carbon heat networks, delivering 
affordable, low carbon, and locally generated 
energy.
Purpose of this Document
Haringey has been a leader in carbon dioxide (CO2) 
reduction and in its work on Climate Change. The 
borough is on target to deliver its 40% carbon 
reduction by 2020 from its 2005 baseline. It has a better 
performance than neighbouring authority areas. But 
there is now increased awareness on the impact of 
carbon and greenhouse gases as scientists have learnt 
and are seeing the impact of carbon emissions on our 
climate across the globe. The globe is now in a Climate 
Change Crisis and dramatic action is required. 
In March 2019, Haringey Council declared a Climate 
Emergency. In doing so, the Council committed to 
developing an action plan to decarbonise the borough by the earliest date that was both ambitious but 
achievable. The foundation work was done with ARUP 
when the Council first committed to becoming a net 
zero-carbon borough, in the Borough Plan (2019-
2024). ARUP provided science-based analysis that 
informed the actions that could be delivered and to 
what timeframe. Based on the Climate Emergency 
declaration, Haringey Council revisited this initial action 
plan and agreed to bring forward both the timeline and 
scale of actions, aiming to be net zero carbon by 2041. 
This document sets out the actions as to how we can 
achieve this goal.
This Action Plan is a borough document which requires 
collective ownership to deliver this level of ambition, 
rather than a ‘top-down’ Council approach. This is a 
fundamental part of the approach which will be needed 
to deliver the 2041 date.
The Councillors and officers are committed to taking 
urgent action to deliver a net zero-carbon borough 
by 2041. Because the Council cannot deliver it all on 
its own, a large part of this commitment is to take a 
leadership role in influencing stakeholders in Haringey; 
and empowering residents and businesses to mitigate 
their own emissions. But it also requires changes at 
a higher level and the Council will lobby the Mayor of 
London and UK Government to take responsibility for 
their own emissions and adopt ambitious legislation 
and policies. The Government’s legislation and policies 
should be supported with funding streams and 
increased powers to enable an increased rate of delivery 
at the local level. 
As these actions were developed, they were reviewed 
and commented on by stakeholders to inform the 
actions. The Action Plan was also challenged by 
leaders in the sustainability and built environment 
sectors to sense check and challenge the actions and 
assumptions. 
This Action Plan will enable Haringey to become a net 
zero-carbon borough by 2041. www.haringey.gov.uk/net-zero-carbon-haringey5Background of Climate Change 
Globally
Climate change is an increasingly global crisis, 
disproportionately affecting those least able to bear 
it and with the least responsibility for causing it. 
Extreme weather linked to climate change has created 
devastation around the world. These changes are being 
felt through more frequently occurring short-term 
events such as droughts, flooding, heat waves and 
storm surges as well as longer term pressures including 
sea level rise and loss of productive land. 
The UK set a statutory target in the Climate Change Act 
2008 to reduce UK greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions 
by 80% from 1990 levels by 2050. In 2015, the UK 
committed to keeping emissions well below 2°C by 
signing up to the Paris Agreement of the United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change. The 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)’s 
Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5°C, published in 
October 2018, sets out the impacts of global warming 
of 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels with available 
scientific, technical and socio-economic evidence. Due 
to historic GHG emissions, the globe is set to warm 
significantly, with wide-ranging impacts as a result. 
Following a recommendation by the UK Committee on 
Climate Change (CCC), the UK legally amended the 
target in June 2019 to reduce all GHG emissions to net 
zero by 2050. 
Human pressures on the world’s ecosystems and 
natural resources and the changing climate have also 
resulted in a serious threat to our biodiversity, with 
nature eroding at unprecedented rates and resulting in 
the acceleration of the sixth mass extinction of wildlife. 
The Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on 
Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES) published 
its Global Assessment Report on Biodiversity and 
Ecosystem Services in May 2019 warning of the severe 
loss of biodiversity and how this will impact people. 
Climate change and large-scale biodiversity loss need to be tackled simultaneously and are both critical in 
ensuring human wellbeing, economic viability and the 
functioning of the natural world.
In response to clear scientific evidence and consensus 
on climate change, and rising public concerns, Haringey 
Council declared a Climate Emergency in March 
2019, being one of the first London Councils to do so. 
The Draft Haringey Climate Change Action Plan was 
published in March 2020. Following its launch, the Action 
Plan underwent a process of public engagement to 
increase the awareness of the issues around climate 
change, to highlight the level of work required to deliver 
this ambition, to gather the views of the community 
on the Action Plan, and to help prioritise actions. Over 
1,000 comments were received by the Council as part 
of this process.
Why Reduce Carbon in Haringey?
The quickly changing climate and large-scale loss 
of biodiversity will impact our borough too, and the 
impacts will continue to worsen due to the borough’s 
urban location, including:
 Æ Heat waves will intensify due to the urban heat island 
effect and buildings not being adapted to higher 
external temperatures;
 Æ Impermeable built-up areas will cause surface water 
flooding;
 Æ Higher demand on the grid during extreme weather 
events will result in more power outages. 
Haringey’s incomes and living standards vary 
considerably and the impacts of climate change will 
exacerbate inequality across residents and businesses. 
This plan targets a borough-wide reduction on carbon 
emissions which will improve living standards for all 
residents. Haringey Climate Change Action Plan6-100.0200.0300.0400.0500.0600.0
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018Carbon emissions (ktC O2)Haringey emissions trend by sect or
Industry & Commerci al Domestic Tran spor t
Figure 1: Haringey’s proportion of emissions for the domestic, industrial and commercial, and transport sectors between 2005 and 2018. 
It shows that the reduction in emissions from 2005 to 2018 is 50% for the domestic sector (from 538 ktCO2 to 327 ktCO2), 27% for the 
industrial and commercial sector (from 296 ktCO2 to 176 ktCO2), and 23% for the transport sector (from 201 ktCO2 to 153 ktCO2). (Source: 
Haringey Annual Carbon Report, 2020)
Haringey Council has for some time been committed to 
reducing the borough’s emissions by 40% by 2020, from 
a 2005 baseline (coined as ‘40:20’). In 2018 we set a new 
target to become a net zero-carbon borough by 2050. 
The Council had worked with Arup to set out a road 
map to 2050 and, after the Council declared a climate 
emergency in March 2019, it followed up with a Climate 
Emergency Report bringing the 2050 target forward to 
the earliest possible date, which we now believe to be 
2041.  
As every tonne of carbon is vital to be reduced, and 
in the context of an emergency, we need to deliver 
many of the actions urgently. Therefore, rather than 
accepting a linear decrease in carbon emissions, we 
have chosen to accelerate actions in response to 
the climate emergency. For this reason, the Haringey 
Climate Change Action Plan proposes a steeper rate of 
decrease in areas that the Council has greater control 
and powers to achieve this. This is shown through 
actions such as the Council’s operational buildings 
becoming Net Zero Carbon by 2027, and increased 
action to improve the take up of active travel options. 
Although nationally the UK Government are aiming to 
become zero carbon by 2050, the Council believes this 
is too late to act. By 2050, the borough and beyond 
could be experiencing catastrophic weather events, and displacing people from their homes. The Council believe 
that with the right support from regional and national 
government, that a 2041 timeframe is achievable and 
therefore we should be striving to achieve this.  
When Haringey started work on delivering a reduction 
on its carbon emissions in 2005, the borough’s 
emissions were estimated to be at 1,041.30kt (4.5t 
emissions per capita). In 2017, the estimated emissions 
for Haringey (within the scope of influence) were 
667.7kt (2.5t per capita). A projected 40% reduction 
on 2005 levels is to achieve a reduction to 624.78kt of 
emissions by 2020.
How Has Haringey Reduced its 
Emissions So Far?
Since 2011, Haringey has published its Annual Carbon 
Report to provide an overview of the carbon emissions 
in relation to the 40:20 target. The 2020 Annual Carbon 
Report shows that, as a borough, we have helped 
reduce carbon emissions from the borough by 36.7% 
and Haringey is on target in meeting the 40% reduction 
by 2020 (also known as 40:20 target) from our 2005 
baseline. 
Our historic success in reducing emissions in 
the borough is due to our proactive working with www.haringey.gov.uk/net-zero-carbon-haringey7
businesses, the community and other stakeholders. 
Our work has included undertaking pilot studies 
and projects, encouraging active travel across the 
borough, implementing various improvements to the 
Council’s estate through LED light fittings and other 
energy efficiency savings, installing 2,200 solar panels 
which generate 565,000 kWh of electricity per year , 
and supporting community groups in reducing their 
emissions through community energy installations, 
home visits and giving energy efficiency advice. Three 
significant projects that have delivered this level of 
carbon reduction are highlighted below: 
 Æ Haringey’s Smart Homes project was delivered 
between 2013 and 2015 for private homeowners. 
It was led by Haringey in cooperation with other 
north London boroughs under the Smart Homes 
scheme, with ECO funding and £6.5m funding from 
the Department for Energy and Climate Change 
(DECC). Grants of up to £6,000 were made available 
to private homeowners following a Green Homes 
assessment (with residents contributing at least 
25% of the cost). With a value of £1.4m, a range of 
energy efficiency works were undertaken including 
internal and external insulation, boiler replacements, 
double/secondary glazing and draught proofing. 
With 4,000 expressions of interest, a total of 1,250 
grants were awarded. 72 businesses also took part 
in the equivalent Smart Business project where 
grants of up to 50% of the cost were awarded. 
The total Smart Homes programme saving was 
estimated at 42,338 tonnes of CO2 (1.05 tCO2 per 
household), per annum.
 Æ The Haringey Innovation Hub was awarded £100k 
by Climate KIC (EU’s Knowledge and Innovation 
Centre) to support new clean technologies from 
universities and start-ups to reduce carbon 
emissions. With over 50 technologies reviewed, 15 
emerging clean technologies have been developed 
further for testing in the borough. Some of the 
designs have included heat recovery from sewers, 
gas boiler optimisation, combined solar PV & 
thermal collectors, passive ventilation and pollution 
reducing pavement. This initiative has since grown 
to a London-wide Better Futures initiative, a low 
carbon business incubator hub with the aim to 
support 100 businesses over the period 2017-
2020.  Æ En10ergy is a social enterprise that was set up 
by the Muswell Hill Sustainability Group. It aims to 
promote and invest in local renewable energy and 
to encourage and facilitate the reduction in carbon 
emissions and waste by households, businesses 
and community buildings. The enterprise has grown 
and delivered significant carbon reduction since its 
creation. En10ergy works with local households, 
businesses and schools, and has also been involved 
in negotiating bulk deals with energy suppliers. With 
140 investors, of whom most live in the borough, 
En10ergy has installed solar PV panels through 
community share offers in four locations: M&S 
store in Muswell Hill (100 panels), Methodist Church 
in Muswell Hill (39 panels), Woodside High School 
in White Hart Lane (150 panels) and Fortismere 
School in Muswell Hill (105 panels). In total, their 
installations are now producing 128,000 kWh per 
year , having generated 290,000 kWh of energy to 
date. This is the type of project we need to nurture 
and grow to realise our carbon reduction targets 
across the borough.
Although we are on track to meet Haringey’s 40:20 
target, emissions need to be reduced at a much larger 
scale to achieve the new target of becoming a net zero 
carbon borough by 2041 and help the UK to meet the 
Paris Agreement.Haringey Climate Change Action Plan8Scope of Emissions within this Action 
Plan 
The Haringey Climate Change Action Plan covers Scope 
1 and 2 CO2 emissions across the borough, as set out by 
the Greenhouse Gas Protocol. The carbon emissions are 
categorised into three groups to clarify how the emissions 
are generated, and who is accountable for these:
Scope 
1Scope 
3Scope 
2Council emission s
Borough emission s
All other 
indir ect 
emissions,  
such as waste 
disposal, 
aviation, diets , 
beha viour 
changeDirect emissions 
from sour ces that 
we own & c ontr ol, 
including fuel 
combustion, 
compan y vehicles , 
and fugit ive 
emissionsIndir ect 
emissions,  
gener ated fr om 
the electricit y 
and heat that we  
pur chase and the 
cooling we  
requir e
Figure 2: Scope of emissions targeted within this Climate Change 
Action Plan
T o ensure that this Climate Change Action Plan is 
realistic and measurable, Scope 3 emissions are 
not included within the borough-wide actions and 
measurements. The Council is unable to measure 
Scope 3 emissions across the borough as we cannot access data on how many residents eat meat, buy local 
products, or fly. 
T o demonstrate leadership, the Council will include 
Scope 3 emissions within its own targeted actions. 
The Council will develop policies around promotion of 
vegetarian and vegan food, local supply chains, and 
council flights in response to this challenge. The Council 
will also develop its own waste management plan for 
waste it generates itself in line with the waste hierarchy.
The Action Plan does include actions to influence and 
educate stakeholders to reduce their wider emissions. 
However , these emissions are not quantified or 
measured within the zero-carbon target of this report. 
Other sectors have also been scoped out of this 
report. Aviation and shipping are two large contributors 
to global carbon emissions; these are not currently 
accounted for in national emissions and the borough 
does not contain any ports or airports. Waste is part 
of the borough’s carbon footprint. However , while 
domestic waste is in the control of the Council and 
measured by the North London Waste Authority, most 
of the commercial waste is collected through privately 
procured companies and the Council cannot obtain this 
information. 
Whilst national targets are set for GHG emissions, in 
Haringey CO2 makes up around 85% of total emissions, 
with methane (CH4) and nitrous oxide (NOx) making 
up the remaining 15%. T argets in Haringey are set 
for carbon emissions only, however our actions will 
indirectly reduce other GHGs simultaneously.  www.haringey.gov.uk/net-zero-carbon-haringey9T rajectory to Reduce Emissions by 2041
Figure 3. This graph shows the rate of decarbonisation required across the energy sectors from around 750 kilo tonnes (kt) CO2e to less than 
100 ktCO2e. It shows that some sectors, such as domestic energy and road transport, need to decarbonise as soon as possible as these 
reduction targets are more achievable now with known technology responses. The graph also shows that emissions from road transport is 
increasing at this time. (Source: ARUP’s Climate Action Haringey: T owards a Zero-Carbon Future Final Report, November 2019)
Under the Haringey Climate Change Action Plan, it 
is estimated that emissions in the borough would 
be reduced to less than 100 ktCO2e, a reduction 
of over 90% from the baseline scenario (Figure 3). 
While this still is short of net zero, it would represent a 
considerable achievement and a very great acceleration 
in the process of decarbonising the UK economy and 
Haringey’s operational carbon footprint. The borough’s 
carbon emission trajectory shown in this report goes 
only as low as can be achieved given the constraints of 
the modelling and current government projections for 
national infrastructure futures. Offsetting and/or carbon 
capture and storage (CCS) will be required to reach true 
zero. 
Key cross-cutting themes have emerged during the 
development of the Haringey Climate Change Action 
Plan which have been embedded in the actions and 
objectives. These include: 
 Æ The scale and impact of the climate crisis requires 
Haringey to be ambitious;  Æ Action on climate change at a local level is action for 
social justice since a changing climate will impact 
most significantly on those who cannot avoid these 
impacts; 
 Æ T aking action on climate change creates 
opportunities to deliver wider benefits for health, 
wellbeing and the local economy; 
 Æ This Action Plan is an evidenced-based approach, 
but the scope of our ambition should also extend 
beyond what is easily measured by the Council. 
Many of these factors, such as aviation and food, 
have a significant impact on climate change, but are 
not included in this plan; 
 Æ Delivery of a target to be net zero carbon by 2041 
cannot be achieved by the Council working alone. All 
the borough’s stakeholders will need to support this 
ambition – residents, businesses and visitors. The 
Council will need to lobby central government and 
others to secure the action and investment needed 
at a national and regional level; Haringey Climate Change Action Plan10
 Æ Achieving a carbon neutral future is as much 
about culture change as it is about infrastructure. 
Communication and engagement with stakeholders 
will be of fundamental importance. T o do this in 
a credible way, the Council must demonstrate 
leadership in terms of its own estate and operations; 
 Æ There are significant challenging issues ahead to 
address to deliver this carbon reduction ambition, 
with strong views on all sides. These include 
addressing emissions from council staff vehicles 
which are used for service delivery (social workers, 
etc), reducing carbon from staff car parking across 
the public sector (doctors, school workers, etc), and 
reprioritisation of highways space for active travel 
and community uses. The Council recognises these 
challenges and will focus engagement work with 
those most affected by these challenges, to bring 
forward solutions. 
Structure of the Report
This Haringey Climate Change Action Plan is informed 
by the recommendations set out by Arup’s T echnical 
reports which are published on the Council’s web pages . 
This work was initiated with the ambition of becoming 
a zero-carbon borough by 2050. This work has been 
reviewed in light of the Climate Emergency and was 
concluded with the ‘Climate Action Haringey: T owards a 
Zero-Carbon Future’ Final Report, which was finalised in 
November 2019.The Haringey Climate Change Action Plan is structured 
as follows:
 Æ The six focus areas on reducing carbon emissions 
for the Climate Change Action Plan:
• Council;
• Housing;
• Workplaces;
• T ransport;
• Energy;
• Community.
 Æ Specific sections on Delivering the Ambition:
• Governance and monitoring;
• Financing;
• Lobbying asks to government and the Greater 
London Authority (GLA).
Each focus area is set out with a context, overall 
objective and set of actions. 
www.haringey.gov.uk/net-zero-carbon-haringey11
Haringey’s Action Plans
The council
Overall Objective: Reduce the operative carbon footprint of the Council to net zero 
by 2027
1  BEIS dataThe Council’s corporate buildings contribute 
approximately 0.8% of the borough’s emissions. The 
major sources responsible for emissions in the borough 
are outside the Council’s control and will require 
significant investment and work by private businesses 
and residents who will need incentives to achieve 
this. It will also require a greatly accelerated rate of 
decarbonisation in the national generation of electricity 
and road transport at a London-wide level. But as a local 
authority, we recognise that we have a responsibility 
to take positive action and provide strong leadership 
on averting the dangerous effects of climate change. 
This is the reason why the Council will work harder to 
achieve meaningful carbon reduction within a shorter 
timeframe. 
The Council has set the date for a zero-carbon council 
at 2027. This will include core council operational 
buildings and all transport-related activities undertaken 
by the Council in the delivery of core services. The rest 
of the buildings from which the Council delivers services 
and is directly responsible for the energy bills (such as 
leisure centres, libraries and schools) will be net zero 
carbon as soon as it is possible. T o bring this forward, 
the Council will publish a work plan for each building 
or site by the end of 2021, setting out how this can be 
achieved. T o support this, the Council will require new 
council buildings to be zero carbon on site from the 
date of adoption of the Action Plan. Alongside these 
measures, the Council will start delivering a large-scale 
retrofitting programme across the Council’s buildings, 
while removing carbon from the vehicles delivering 
front-line services as soon as it can.   The Council will share learning on what works on 
projects, it will support the supply chain as it develops, 
seek to attract green investment into the borough, 
and show leadership in our ambition and delivery. As 
a publicly funded organisation, we will do this in an 
efficient, cost effective, and responsible way. In doing 
this we will deliver the borough’s carbon reduction 
ambition, improve local air quality, and demonstrate 
strong financial management by reducing the Council’s 
future energy spend.
Historic performance 
Haringey Council has made significant efforts to reduce 
emissions from our estate and operations. In 2008 we 
undertook our first Carbon Reduction Plan and since 
then we have reduced our emissions by 36% compared 
to 2005 levels1. 
The 2008 Plan set out a strategic and planned approach 
to reducing carbon emissions from our estate and 
operations. The Plan targeted the areas of the 
Council’s activity which contributed most to our carbon 
emissions (e.g., swimming pools and leisure centres, 
car parks, the vehicle fleet, offices, and community 
centres).
Since Haringey’s First Annual Carbon Report in 2011, 
the Council has undertaken a multitude of climate 
initiatives. The key measures delivered through the Plan 
included:
 Æ 38 solar PV systems installed on the roofs of 
Council schools, housing and corporate sites, which 
generated 380,000 kWh of electricity in 2019/2020, 
saving our sites around £45k in electricity; Haringey Climate Change Action Plan12 Æ Boiler upgrades across the Corporate estates;
 Æ Approximately 50% of street lighting upgraded to 
LED 
 Æ LED lighting in main Council buildings and schools; 
 Æ Electric staff pool car and new car club installed and 
open to all staff; 
 Æ Active T ravel programmes across the borough 
including community grants and behaviour change 
education in schools and community centres;
 Æ Energy improvements included into the 
specification of refurbishment at George Meehan 
House; and
 Æ School Streets Plan across the borough.
The Council bought £5.2m of electricity and gas for 
the corporate estate in 2018/19. This covers energy 
for schools, corporate buildings (including libraries, 
mortuaries, park buildings) and operational buildings. 
It does not include Homes for Haringey. Reducing our 
energy consumption will improve our environmental 
performance, and reduce our revenue spend on energy. 
Key partners which are required to deliver this vision 
include providers of currently outsourced services such 
as Veolia and other members of the Council’s supply 
chain.Three-Stage Delivery of Zero Carbon 
Council 
T o deliver this level of ambition of a Zero Carbon 
Council, the Council will deliver a three-stage process. 
Alongside this, we will work to demonstrate a leadership 
role in reducing the Council’s emissions.   
As the first stage in this approach the Council has 
identified its core operational buildings together with 
the transport emissions from the Council’s in-house 
fleet and the Council will make these Net Zero Carbon 
by 2027. 
The Council will transition transport-related activities 
that are directly related to front-line service delivery 
(such as Council fleet vehicles) to zero carbon fuels. 
This will be achieved by reviewing the type of vehicles 
required to deliver these front-line services, and by 
working to replace carbon intensive vehicles with active 
travel options, or zero carbon vehicles where a viable 
option exists. For in-house fleet this will be delivered 
by 2027. For out-sourced fleet activities this will be 
undertaken at each contract renewal, and for staff who 
use their own vehicles for service delivery the Council 
will work with them to transition as soon as is feasible. 
The Council will bring forward a plan for the out-sourced 
fleet activities by the end of 2021 setting out estimated 
timeframes. 
Secondly, the Council will review all its corporate 
operations. These cover the buildings that are owned 
by the Council, buildings from where Council services 
are delivered, buildings that have Council employees in 
them, and where the Council pays the energy bills – as 
well as the activities carried out from these buildings. 
This will include schools, libraries, leisure centres, 
depots, adult centres, and children’s centres, as well as 
the Council and Homes for Haringey’s offices. However , 
it will not include Council homes, which are covered 
separately by this Action Plan. Each one of these 
buildings will have an individual plan setting out the 
measures required, and the cost of delivery to get the 
building to zero carbon. We aim to have these plans in 
place by the end of 2021.
Each of these buildings will be reviewed in terms of: 
 Æ consuming less carbon in carrying out the operation 
itself, distinct from the building;
 Æ improving the energy efficiency standards of the 
building – double glazing, wall insulation etc.
www.haringey.gov.uk/net-zero-carbon-haringey13 Æ improving current heating and hot water systems to 
reduce carbon emissions, while improving air quality 
and operational costs – new boilers, the use of air 
source heat pumps etc.
 Æ reviewing and maximising the delivery of renewable 
energy generation in each building – solar PV panels, 
solar thermal panels, heat pumps, etc.
 Æ intention to reduce staff car parking spaces and 
provide EV charging points to reduce associated 
travel emissions.   
Through reviewing and working to implement measures 
on the Council’s buildings, the consumption of each 
building will be significantly reduced. T o achieve the net 
Zero Carbon standard, all remaining energy required 
(gas and electricity) for the building will be purchased 
from a certified Green Energy Supplier . T o demonstrate 
true additionality of renewable energy generation, the 
Council will work with other authorities across London 
to develop a business case for a Power Purchase 
Agreement (PPA) with the opportunity for direct 
investment in renewable generation.  Any Council new build projects that the Council delivers 
for schools and operational use will be designed and 
constructed to be Zero Carbon on site and maximise 
renewable energy generation. This is already being 
designed into new buildings and planned to be delivered 
on sites such as the new council depot at Marsh Lane, 
the redevelopment at Osborne Grove Nursing Home 
and the residential new build at Edith Road. 
After 2027, the final stage will be to switch energy 
suppliers from carbon fuels (grid electricity, gas, diesel) 
and fund the purchase of green energy. This may 
include green electricity, green gas, electric vehicles 
powered by renewable electricity. Any services that have 
no choice but to emit carbon for core service delivery 
(such as flights required for social services) these will be 
offset through local offsetting schemes with a verified 
additional carbon reduction. These will be projects that 
have not yet identified funding and would not happen 
without this funding. 
The Council will report on this in the Annual Carbon 
Report, which is required in the Council’s Constitution. 
The report will highlight the work that the Council has 
done, alongside stakeholder projects.  
Haringey Climate Change Action Plan14Council Actions
Objective C1 – Work towards a zero-carbon footprint of the Council in its operational buildings (not 
including housing or commercial property) and transport, with core council buildings being net zero by 
2027.
The Council’s corporate buildings contribute approximately 0.8% of the borough’s emissions. The Council has 
full control of these and will lead by example to be zero carbon as soon as it can for the whole stock, but core 
buildings and all transport emissions by 2027.
Action Owner Property Services / Carbon Management 
Cost In order to build to a zero-carbon specification, new corporate buildings across our corporate 
estate are likely to increase in the magnitude of <5%. Refurbishments to corporate buildings 
will be considered on a case-by-case basis as part of the Council’s review process. Energy 
prices are currently volatile. It is expected that by 2025, the price of electricity will be between 
11% and 67% higher based on 2018 prices, and in relation to gas the price variance could see 
an increase of 55% based on 2018 prices. Switching to a Green Energy Supplier for electricity 
across the Corporate Estate has already been agreed within the current contracts and will only 
increase bills by 0.3% (£17k) in year 1.
Measurable 
metrics (Source)Annual utilities (Elec & Gas) consumption data and % green energy supplied
kW annual electricity generation on Council-owned properties
Potential carbon 
reductionSignificant in terms of the Council’s performance, and leadership role. But the Council’s 
corporate buildings and schools only account for approx. 0.8% of the borough’s overall carbon 
footprint. 
Action Deadline Action owner Notes 
For the Council’s core operational buildings 
and all transport-related activities for 
service delivery to be net zero carbon.By 2027 Carbon 
Management 
/ Strategic 
Property UnitFunding in place for Action Plan. 
Business case to be developed 
and funded.  
For the Council to move to 100% green 
tariffs (electricity, gas and fuel) by 2027.By 2020 (elec.)
By 2025 (gas.)Carbon 
Management 
/ Strategic 
Property UnitDelivered by energy efficiency 
and green tariffs (+0.3% 
on elec.) there is increasing 
demand from the schools to 
switch. Energy contracts are in 
three-year cycles.
T o develop a Power Purchase Agreement 
(which would mean direct investment in 
renewables) with an energy supplier for the 
Council’s Electrical needs.By 2025 Carbon 
Management
Deliver a net Zero Carbon Action Plan for all 
corporate buildings (including schools and 
leisure centres). Start to deliver measures 
based on the local business cases.By 2022 Carbon 
ManagementThis will be picked up as it is 
a requirement secured in the 
new energy contracts. 
All new Council corporate building projects 
to be zero carbon or carbon positive on 
site. And that the Council’s New Ways of 
Working (NWOW) incorporates carbon 
reduction as a key objective. From 2021 Carbon 
Management 
/ Property 
Services 
All refurbishments of council buildings 
to maximise opportunities for carbon 
reduction, through lean, clean, green 
and seen measures, targeting an EPC B 
standard. 
Roll out a boiler replacement programme in 
core buildings.From 2021 Carbon 
Management 
/ Strategic 
Property Unitwww.haringey.gov.uk/net-zero-carbon-haringey15Action Deadline Action owner Notes 
For all new build and major refurbishments 
to include a ‘real time’ usage and 
generation display in reception areas. Ongoing Carbon 
Management 
/ Strategic 
Property UnitNew build monitoring is 
required by the new London 
Plan. This is key for awareness 
and cultural change.  
Seek to expand the number of council 
solar installations and work to support 
community installations on council assets.From 2021 Carbon 
Management 
/ Strategic 
Property Unit
Objective C2 - T o reduce the carbon emissions from the council fleet and service required transportation 
through active travel and electric vehicle initiatives and for the fleet to be zero emission by 2027
Zero emission vehicles, including two-wheeled transport, should be prioritised when procuring new fleets. This 
should be supported by high quality facilities for active travel users.
Action Owner Carbon Management / Fleet Management / HR / Parking 
Cost Business cases will be made on the Corporate Fleets and the switch 
to EVs.  
Although active travel infrastructure may increase costs, a healthier 
work force would be delivered with active travel. 
Measurable metrics (source) Number of Council staff and teacher permits issued 
% of staff taking active travel options to work (Staff T ravel Survey)
Number of vehicles and % of zero emitting vehicles in the Council 
Fleet
Potential carbon reduction Small, but will also deliver significant air quality improvements and a 
healthier work force through active travel options. 
Action Deadline Action owner Notes 
T o annually review, update, and promote the Active 
T ravel Plan to all staff.Ongoing Active T ravel 
/ Carbon 
Management  
Deliver new accessible cycling and shower facilities 
in all new council build projects for staff.From 2020 Carbon 
Management 
/ Strategic 
Property Unit
T o continue the delivery of a cleaner and a zero-
emission fleet for all in-house vehicles. Support 
staff who use vehicles for service delivery to 
transition to zero-carbon vehicles as soon as 
possible. By 2025 All Services In line with the Ultra Low 
Emission Vehicle Action 
Plan. 
Review the Parking Policy and review all staff 
parking spaces and permits with the objective of 
reducing overall car parking spaces and permits. 
This will improve air quality, deliver carbon 
reduction and more public space. Work with staff 
to increase active and zero carbon transport travel 
for and to work. From 2021 Highways 
/ Human 
Resources 
/ Facilities 
Management / 
PlanningThis strategy will be 
underpinned by engaging 
with staff members on 
why people drive to work, 
how they choose to travel 
can change and what the 
impacts will be.
Space will continue to be 
provided for blue badge 
holders and essential car 
users.Haringey Climate Change Action Plan16Action Deadline Action owner Notes 
No new car parking in Council Buildings, except for 
key users (Blue Badges) and deliveries.From 2020 Strategic 
Property UnitT o review the key users list 
by removing teachers.
All parking bays on the corporate estate to include 
fully accessible charging infrastructure for electric 
vehicles and e-bikes.From 2020 Strategic 
Property Unit
/ Parking 
Review essential car users’ criteria and support 
these staff members to transition to zero-emitting 
vehicles for business use. From 2021 Carbon 
Management 
/ HRDiscussions have been 
held with some essential 
car users in the Council. 
T o increase the rate of 
transitioning to zero-
emitting vehicles (pool 
vehicles, grant/loan 
schemes etc).
Objective C3 - T o reduce the carbon emissions from the wider aspects of the Council’s operations and 
investments
The Council’s wider impact is significant to leading by example, and to influence our partners to implement 
change.
Action Owner Finance / HR / Carbon Management
Cost Projects may increase in capital costs, but often deliver revenue 
savings. T o be assessed on a case-by-case basis.   
Measurable metrics % of key decisions that have considered carbon reduction
% of the Council finance portfolio investing in low carbon investments 
Potential Carbon
reductionSignificant, as the Council investments (such as pension) have the 
potential to help grow the low carbon industrial sector and reduce 
indirect Council emissions.  
Action Deadline Action owner Notes 
All council decisions need to factor in 
carbon reduction.Ongoing Carbon 
Management / 
Corporate Policy 
/ Cabinet
T o review the Council’s banking and 
pension investments, and ensure they 
are investing in low-carbon investment 
schemes and avoiding carbon-based 
industries, where this is consistent 
with our fiduciary duty. T o measure the 
carbon intensity and footprint of the 
Council’s pension investments and 
monitor for improvements.Ongoing Finance 
/ Carbon 
Management / 
ProcurementThe Pension Fund has over 50% of 
its equity investment in low carbon 
investment fund at the moment and 
plans are in place to increase this 
to 100% of equity investments in 
low carbon strategies in 2021. Low 
carbon investments reduce the fund 
exposure to carbon emissions.
Promote vegetarian and vegan foods 
through meals procurement and cafes 
that the Council lets.From 2020 Procurement 
/ Carbon 
Management Subject to approval by the service 
area. 
For the Council and public bodies to 
support the local supply chain, including 
food suppliers, and other businesses as 
part of carbon reduction programme.From 2020 Procurement 
/ Carbon 
Management Subject to approval by the relevant 
service area. Supports local wealth 
agenda. www.haringey.gov.uk/net-zero-carbon-haringey17Action Deadline Action owner Notes 
Promote vegetarian and vegan food 
that is locally produced at Council 
events through our procurement 
strategies.From 2021 All Services / 
Procurement 
T o include carbon reduction as a core 
requirement in all procurements and 
seek to set targets to reduce embodied 
energy.2021 Procurement 
/ Carbon 
ManagementThis is included in the social value 
tool kit and where appropriate will be 
a contractual obligation.
Ensure all projects and programmes 
have considered carbon reduction 
during their design, and that all projects 
and programmes over £1m deliver a 
carbon reduction.2020 Finance 
/ Carbon 
Management / 
Projects 
Promote the Council’s policy of flights 
only being allowed for key services 
(such as coroners, social workers etc.).2025 Finance 
/ Carbon 
Management / 
HR Policy: No flights may be booked for 
destinations served by rail (including 
Eurostar). 
Objective C4 - T o increase awareness and empower staff to take positive carbon reduction decisions
Awareness raising is vital for staff to take ownership of, and deliver , carbon reduction initiatives, as well as to 
instigate behavioural change.
Action Owner HR / Carbon Management / Staff
Cost <£5k and existing staff time
Measurable metrics Number of staff events focused on sustainability each year 
Potential carbon reduction Medium. Many staff are local residents, and this has the potential 
to engage and support wider stakeholders through action and 
information. It increases ownership of the agenda issue throughout 
the organisation. 
Action Deadline Action owner Notes 
Work with HR and the Unions to include 
environmental standards (like equalities) 
within all staff job descriptions and 
contracts.2020 Carbon 
Management / 
HR / Unions 
Deliver training and guest speaker events 
on carbon reduction in life / work choices. 
Promote behaviour change ideas around 
carbon reduction including lifestyle 
choices.From 
2021Carbon 
ManagementThis will form part of the initial 
engagement period in 2020 and 
continue from the adoption of the 
Action Plan.
Work with the staff networks and Unions 
to promote environmental schemes and 
programmes.From 
2020 Carbon 
Management / 
HR / Unions
Monitor and publish our performance on 
carbon reduction in the Annual Carbon 
Report. 2021 Carbon 
Management / 
CommsThis has been published annually 
since 2011 and will be adapted to 
include performance on carbon 
reduction against the Action Plan.
T o develop and deliver a Council waste 
management plan. T o focus staff and 
council systems to follow the waste 
hierarchy: to reduce, reuse, repurpose, 
repair resources before recycling, with 
recovering or disposing as a last resort.By 2021 Waste Services 
/ Facilities 
Management / 
ProcurementThis supports the emerging Single 
Use Plastic Policy and new ways of 
working, and should also include 
office furniture, electronics and food 
waste. Haringey Climate Change Action Plan18Housing
Overall Objective: Achieve an EPC B on average in all in domestic buildings by 2041
The borough’s homes make up 50% of the borough’s 
total carbon emissions, through electricity demand 
and heating requirements. This is by far the biggest 
sector we need to target if we are to deliver our 
borough Net Zero Carbon ambition. New homes are 
an opportunity for the adoption of best practice and 
can minimise emissions easily as they are often built to 
a high standard. The bigger challenge, technically and 
financially, is the ability to reduce emissions within the 
existing building housing stock. Although the cost of 
action is expensive, analysis shows that over the same 
time period it is only slightly more than the cost of 
business as usual. 
The Council owns approximately 17 per cent of the 
borough’s housing stock, which is managed by Homes 
for Haringey. These homes amount to approximately 
7-8% of the borough’s total emissions. The Council 
can deliver projects to reduce these emissions to 
benefit the residents in these homes. The challenge 
lies where the Council has a more constrained influence within the wider borough stakeholders – landlords 
and private homeowners. The Council needs to be 
supported by regional and national government to 
increase our influence, both with legislation and funding 
opportunities to help residents bring forward positive 
measures. In response to this, the Council will lobby 
relevant bodies will reflect these barriers and work in 
partnership with homeowners to encourage and enable 
action. 
Co-benefits of healthy, warm homes
Insulating homes with passive design solutions will 
deliver healthier homes for people to live in. Making 
people feel thermally comfortable in their homes mean 
they are less at risk of physical and mental health issues 
and will be more productive working. 
The Council will work to insulate homes and ensure 
they are ventilated properly, ensuring passive solutions 
are installed before relying on renewable energy 
technologies.
Domestic Carbon Emissions
240.2 
28.7 139.0 
8.8 - 0.1 0.9 6.6 
 - 50.0 100.0 150.0 200.0 250.0
2015 2041Carbon emissions (ktCO2)Domestic carbon emission s
Domestic Heat
Domestic Electr icity
Domestic Electr icity
(Cooling )
Figure 4: Domestic carbon emissions, comparing emissions in 2015 and 2041. It shows that half the emissions in 2015 came from domestic 
heating (240,000 kilo tonnes (kt) of CO2). This needs to be reduced drastically to 28,000 ktCO2 in 2041, when it is expected that half the 
domestic emissions will still be due to heating homes.www.haringey.gov.uk/net-zero-carbon-haringey19Historic Performance
The Council’s capacity to improve social housing has 
been demonstrated by the Decent Homes programme 
improvements to 11,000 homes over a ten-year 
programme to ensure that homes met the minimum 
comfort, and health and safety standards set out by 
the governments’ Decent Homes criteria. Emission 
savings associated with interventions, such as boiler 
replacement, insulation and double glazing, are 
estimated to be approximately 5,000 tCO2/year .
Housing Challenge Ahead
The majority of existing homes in Haringey will still be 
standing in 2041, with current UK estimates showing 
that 80-85% of homes in the UK will still exist in 2050. 
Currently, homes in the borough have an average 
Environmental Performance Certificate (EPC) of D (see 
Figure 5). T o achieve significant reductions in people’s 
heating, electricity and cooling use, we all need to 
undertake deep retrofits across our homes, ensure all 
new homes2 are built to zero carbon standards, and 
focus on changing people’s energy behaviour . 
2  The London Plan target for Haringey is to build 52,000 homes by 2050. The next ten years we will need to build 1,502 homes per year (Policy H1, 
New London Plan).Whole-home deep retrofits will include insulating walls 
internally or externally, upgrading all windows and doors, 
insulating roofs, floors and heating systems, upgrading 
ventilation systems and connecting homes to low 
carbon heat and electricity sources. When retrofits are 
completed, installers need to explain how heating and 
ventilation systems operate (ideally through web links 
to hand over to future residents) and highlight how to 
reduce energy use. Potential financial models to help 
residents to fund their retrofit interventions will be 
investigated.
New homes will need to meet the Zero Carbon 
Standard to avoid requiring a further retrofit in the next 
10 years. Haringey adopted the new carbon offset 
price of £95 on 1 January 2020 and will progress the 
implementation of a higher carbon offset price.
The Council will work with key partners to deliver the 
housing targets, including Homes for Haringey, Parity 
Projects, the Mayor’s Retrofit Accelerator programme, 
SHINE, Local Energy Advice Partnership, housing 
associations, landlords, and private homeowners. 
Figure 5: Chart showing the spread of energy performance data of all homes in Haringey (Source: EPC data from CROHM Parity Projects 
database). Only a small proportion of homes have an EPC of B or better , with the majority of homes achieving EPC D.Haringey Climate Change Action Plan20Housing Actions
Objective H1 - Programme of deep retrofitting 1,300 council-owned homes per year to achieve an 
average of EPC of B by 2035 (or equivalent standard).
Council-owned housing equates to approximately 8% of the borough’s emissions. However , the council has 
direct influence over these emissions.
Action Owner Property Services / Carbon Management / Housing / Homes for Haringey
Cost HRA capital funding of £101m was agreed by cabinet in February 2020, covering the cost 
for the Affordable Energy Programme to bring all council-owned properties to EPC C. 
Further work and funding will be required to cover retrofitting properties to EPC B.
Measurable metrics % of council-owned housing units at or above EPC B
Potential carbon 
reductionSignificant. By 2035 Council housing retrofits to have reduced energy use in these 
homes by 68 GWh per year , compared with 2015, delivering an average reduction of 20% 
per property.
Action Deadline Action owner Notes 
Implement an estate-wide pilot scheme 
of at least 150 homes with the ability to 
be replicated and scaled up to reach peak 
installations of 1,300 homes per year by 
2035. Integrate a post-retrofit handover to 
train users on how to use their home the 
most efficiently.By 2023 Carbon 
Management 
/ Housing / 
Homes for 
HaringeyDevelop a model that can deliver 
quick and significant energy 
improvements and use Decent 
Homes programme as a basis. 
Currently developing an 
Energiesprong pilot project.
Review contract KPIs and programme to 
integrate ambition for an average of EPC 
B into maintenance and regeneration 
programmes. Improve all existing housing 
stock bought by the Council to EPC B before 
occupation of these units.2022 Carbon 
Management 
/ Housing / 
Homes for 
Haringey
Work up a delivery plan to achieve an 
average of EPC B rating for all council-owned 
residential properties by 2035, reviewing void 
strategies, existing EPC data from CROHM 
tool. By 2022 Carbon 
Management 
/ Housing / 
Homes for 
HaringeyUse data from CROHM tool by 
Parity Projects with input from 
Homes for Haringey.
Set up a follow-up delivery plan to retrofit 
council-owned housing up to EPC A by 2041, 
where practically feasible.2041 Carbon 
ManagementRelies on future technologies 
to retrofit, no costing has been 
undertaken for this.
Objective H2 – Deliver a net zero carbon housing portfolio for the first Council new build homes delivered 
by 2022.
The Council has direct influence over these emissions and should therefore ensure that these homes are zero 
carbon upon completion.
Action Owner Carbon Management / Housing
Cost It is estimated that to deliver zero-carbon units range between 3.6-6.8% above 
baseline of delivering a business as usual with gas boilers scenario. Long-term savings 
for occupiers would reduce risk of debts occurring.  
Measurable metrics Average SAP score of Council new housing portfolio
Potential carbon 
reductionDelivering new build schemes to the zero-carbon standard would deliver a 65% 
reduction in carbon emissions compared to the current benchmark of a 35% 
improvement to Building Regulations.www.haringey.gov.uk/net-zero-carbon-haringey21Action Deadline Action owner Notes 
Develop a Council Standard Housing 
Design Guide, setting out sustainable 
design including carbon reduction 
principles.By 2020 Carbon 
Management / 
Housing
Embed carbon reduction and minimising 
overheating risk as essential criteria 
within all tenders in the house-building 
programme. By 2021 Carbon 
Management / 
Procurement / 
HousingThrough the social 
value tool kit and 
liaison with the service 
areas, this will be 
embedded within all 
appropriate contracts.
Reduce carbon emissions in council-
bought new build properties to 100% 
improvement on Building Regulations 
Part L, where feasible.By 2022 Housing 
/ Carbon 
ManagementT o consider both 
operational and 
embodied carbon 
emissions.
Monitor energy performance and 
occupancy in all Council new build 
properties to review and inform future 
zero-carbon house building portfolios 
and tenants.From 
2022Housing
Objective H3 – Provide technical advice on energy efficiency to 6,000 fuel poor and able-to-pay domestic 
property owners and occupiers per year to support Objective H4.
Separate approaches and funding mechanisms would be required to effectively support both fuel poor and able-
to-pay residents.
Action Owner Carbon Management
Cost There would be no capital or programme costs by the Council. The engagement with 
approximately 86,000 households should be done at a regional level, and it should be 
designed with the GLA. 
This action will be supported by the work currently being undertaken by the Council in 
partnership with Parity Projects in a scheme funded by the Department of Business, 
Energy and Industrial Strategy to increase retrofit uptake in the able-to-pay market 
through support for supply chain co-ordination.  
Measurable metrics Number of training/advice sessions per year
% of homes engaged with through home visits 
Potential carbon 
reductionReduced energy costs delivering 260 GWh/year reduction in energy consumption 
by 2035 if all non-council owned homes are improved to EPC C, equal to 16% of 
domestic energy demand in 2015.
Action Deadline Action owner Notes 
Lobby the GLA to coordinate London-wide 
provision of technical energy efficiency advice 
(to achieve delivery of advice to 6,000 private 
households per year across Haringey).2020 Carbon 
Management
Identify the streets/areas with the greatest 
potential for energy efficiency improvements 
including energy generation. T o inform 
a neighbourhood approach to delivering 
education and awareness campaigns to 
retrofitting.By 2021 Carbon 
Management 
/ Housing / 
Homes for 
HaringeyParity Projects’ database will 
enable this analysis to take 
place. Analysis for feasibility of 
solar PV in Haringey will also 
feed into this, with London’s 
Solar Opportunity Map and 
London Building Stock Model. 
Campaigns could be delivered 
with help of community groups.Haringey Climate Change Action Plan22Action Deadline Action owner Notes 
Develop homeowner guidance to advise on 
domestic improvements required to reach 
EPC B, and specifically develop guidance for 
retrofitting heritage assets.By 2025 Housing 
/ Carbon 
Management / 
HeritageLink to Parity projects.
Support ‘smart retrofit academies’ to train 
local builders and apprentices in retrofit 
techniques for modern and old buildings, 
digital innovations and natural building 
materials. Reskilling as existing carbon related 
jobs decline. By 2025 Economic 
DevelopmentT o be put into Economic 
Development Strategy.
Deliver external training sessions for 
homeowners and aim to reach at least 37,000 
homes by 2026, targeting a mixture of unit and 
tenure types.By 2026 Carbon 
Management / 
HousingPartner with local initiatives 
such as RetrofitWorks, LEAP 
and SHINE London.
Objective H4 – Provide and identify funding assistance to support delivery of improvements in privately-
owned residential properties.
Separate approaches and funding mechanisms would be required to effectively support both fuel poor and able-
to-pay residents.
Action Owner Finance / Regeneration / Carbon Management / Borough Stakeholders
Cost T o attract this level of funding for private homeowners, the Council would need 
to coordinate private-sector funding and work up business cases for external 
funding, loans and investment.
External capital cost of £660m (average of £7,700 per property) would be required 
for privately-owned properties.
Measurable metrics Number and value of grants and/or loans awarded by the Council to homeowners 
% improvement on EPC score and reduction in energy by residential property 
following grant
Potential carbon reduction Minor but needed. Reduced energy costs delivering 260GWh/year reduction in 
energy consumption by 2050 if full retrofit of private housing sector is achieved. 
This represents 16% of domestic energy demand in 2015.
Action Deadline Action owner Notes 
Lobby government to:
 Æ increase homeowner funding to retrofit their 
properties to EPC B;
 Æ cut VA T on refurbishment, repair and 
maintenance from 20% to 5%. 2021 Carbon 
Management
Identify external funding streams and help the 
bidding for funding to enable delivery of EPC 
B across all existing housing stock, temporary 
housing, hostels and bed & breakfasts.From 
2021Finance / Carbon 
Management / 
Housing
Build internal business cases to embed carbon 
reduction in all Council projects to deliver EPC B.2023 Procurement / 
FinanceStrategic Procurement 
will review business 
cases to ensure this 
has been considered.
Seek appropriate finance models for leaseholders 
on council estates that are undergoing retrofits, 
and ensure they are able to ‘opt in’ to the works to 
ensure a whole-building or whole-estate approach.From 
2021Legal / Carbon 
Management / 
Housing / Homes 
for HaringeyA different model 
may need to be 
developed for fuel poor 
households.
Advertise funding and loan opportunities to 
individuals and stakeholder groups.From 
2021Housing / Carbon 
Management www.haringey.gov.uk/net-zero-carbon-haringey23Action Deadline Action owner Notes 
Partner with external parties to help deliver larger 
scale retrofit projects across the private sector .2025 Regeneration 
/ Housing / 
ProcurementSuch as RetrofitWorks 
and housing 
associations.
Explore the setting up of local pop-up advice 
centres or stalls to help residents and businesses 
with retrofitting and installing renewable energy 
technologies.2021-
2022Carbon 
Management / 
Regeneration / T own 
Centres
Objective H5 – Work with landlords to go beyond the minimum standard of Energy Performance required, 
and aim for an EPC C standard for private sector housing by 2035. 
Having a clear framework of national regulations and enforcement mechanisms are key to delivering objectives 
in the housing sector . This is especially important as the objectives set out in this Action Plan are more ambitious 
than that set at regional and national level. 
Action Owner Environmental Health
Cost New Government ask of £140k to fund identification of non-conforming properties 
External capital cost to improve failing properties is £320m to be paid for privately to 
retrofit 43,000 privately rented homes (which is a proportion of the £660m estimate 
for all private homes in H4).
Measurable metrics Number of Private Rented Sector properties that have applied for a property licence 
which have a rating of less than E and the action taken by those Landlords to ensure 
compliance voluntarily or through the use of statutory interventions.
Number of landlords and letting agents who have attended training events per year 
on how to achieve more energy efficient homes. 
Potential carbon 
reductionCurrent legislation only requires compliance to EPC level E, so carbon reduction will be 
low until MEES are increased. Energy efficiency works in the private rented sector to 
bring all properties up to a high EPC C could deliver 120GWh of energy savings.
Action Deadline Action owner Notes 
Lobby national government to: 
Enable Councils to recharge the true costs of 
enforcing this legalisation; 
Revise minimum EPC rating required at point of 
sale/let for all private sector homes to EPC B by 
2035 (current requirement is EPC E).2021 Carbon 
ManagementCan use benefits and existing 
data on how energy efficiently 
is delivered.
Develop approach to identify non-compliant 
properties and target these properties to comply. 2021 Environmental 
Health / 
Building 
Control                         Initial analysis of CROHM tool 
to inform approach.
Identify penalties and incentives for landlords 
to comply with legislation and go beyond the 
minimum requirements.2021 Carbon 
Management 
/ Building 
ControlReview against the cost to 
retrofit properties.
Require all landlords of privately rented homes to 
provide an EPC certificate where applicable when 
applying for a property licence.From 2021 Housing / 
Licence
Organise training events for estate agents, 
landlords and landlord associations on EPC 
requirements and advice on how to retrofit 
properties.2022 Carbon 
Management / 
HousingHaringey Climate Change Action Plan24Objective H6 - Achieve zero carbon in new and redeveloped homes on site. 
Ensuring new homes are built to the highest fabric and energy efficiency standards the first-time round, will 
circumvent these homes needing to be retrofitted in the future. 
Action Owner Carbon Management / Planning Policy
Cost <£10k gathering evidence, specific campaigns etc (to be funded through the 
Local Plan review funding). This action requires reprioritisation of existing work 
programmes to enable delivery.
Measurable metrics (Data 
Owner)Average % of carbon emissions saved on site in residential schemes permitted 
per year
Potential carbon reduction Significant. Reduced energy costs in operation and avoided cost of future retrofit 
works.
Action Deadline Action owner Notes 
Lobby national government and GLA to:
Improve fabric requirements in Building 
Regulations Part L beyond October 2019 
proposals, before 2025, which requires 
carbon emission modelling software in new 
developments;
Remove VA T on refurbishments;
Change policy to allow for energy efficiency 
measures to be installed in buildings in 
conservation areas.2021 Carbon 
ManagementT o update existing SAP 
modelling which does not 
accurately represent carbon 
emissions in developments.
Deliver training for planning staff and proactively 
engage in the planning process to deliver policy 
requirements.2021 Carbon 
ManagementSupporting carbon reduction 
across all applications.
Produce new planning guidance on overheating, 
green roofs and on-site carbon reduction 
measures, and update the Sustainable Design 
and Construction SPD.2021 Carbon 
Management / 
Planning PolicyWithin remit of existing Carbon 
Management staff.
Update the cost of carbon to a price that 
incentivises on-site reduction and review every 
2 years.2020 Carbon 
Management / 
Planning PolicyFirst increase to £95/tCO2 
took effect on 1st January 
2020. Further review underway 
following the publication of the 
Cost of Carbon Report by LETI 
(May 2020).
Deliver updated retrofit design guides 
for conservation areas to set out the 
recommended approach to retrofitting 
sensitively and minimising impact on 
heritage assets. T o engage on implications 
of fabric improvements and energy reduction 
technologies on a cross-disciplinary basis.2021 Carbon 
Management / 
Planning Policy
Set ambitious carbon reduction planning 
policies for existing and new buildings in 
forthcoming Local Plan reviews.2022 Carbon 
Management / 
Planning PolicySubject to any changes 
to Building Regulations 
implemented at national level 
that may restrict local powers to 
set higher standards.www.haringey.gov.uk/net-zero-carbon-haringey25Non-Domestic Building and Workplace Emissions
Overall Objective: Achieve an EPC B on average in all in non-domestic buildings and 
reduce business related carbon emissions.
Similar to the domestic sector , carbon emissions 
from businesses in Haringey are mostly related to the 
buildings they occupy. Most of non-domestic buildings 
are commercial buildings owned and managed by 
private landlords. Another challenge for the borough is 
that most of Haringey’s businesses are micro- and small 
businesses meaning that these organisations often 
have limited resources to deliver action. Other non-
domestic buildings included under this section include 
schools, healthcare, leisure and community buildings.
The emissions from non-domestic buildings are 
primarily those from heating and lighting buildings. 
These are responsible for just over 20% of the 
emissions in the borough.  
‘Process emissions’ from industry are the emissions 
associated with fuel and energy used by businesses for 
industrial and manufacturing processes (i.e., the other 
energy they use that is not for heating and lighting 
the buildings they occupy). These are accounted for separately in the data and make up a small proportion of 
emissions in the borough, reflecting that Haringey does 
not have heavy industrial activity within the borough.  
The Council can directly influence businesses in 
properties which we own, by implementing energy 
efficiency measures. We can also work with the largest 
emitters in the borough (Alexandra Palace, Wood 
Green Mall, the Crown Court, and T ottenham Hotspur 
Stadium) to work together to mitigate their emissions.
The actions focus on refurbishing existing buildings, 
energy supply choices, and behavioural changes within 
the workforce and high standard new buildings.Haringey Climate Change Action Plan26Workplace Actions
Objective W1 – T arget all businesses to increase prioritisation of carbon emission reduction in commercial 
decision making and facilitate a retrofit program by 2025 (approx. 11,750 businesses).
The majority of businesses in Haringey are micro-businesses, sometimes meaning that carbon reduction is not a 
priority. This action sets out to aid businesses to consider carbon reduction initiatives and the economic benefits 
of doing so.
Action Owner Carbon Management / Property / Economic Development
Cost Capital cost of £100m to be funded and spent externally to deliver the necessary 
retrofits in privately-owned non-residential buildings at a rough average of £22,000 per 
property (across roughly 4-5 different typologies). 
Additional funding may be required to cover the cost of technical studies and project 
development assistance.
Measurable metrics Number and value of grants and/or loans awarded by the Council to businesses 
Number of engagements per year (new businesses, and repeat engagements)
Average EPC score across all commercial properties in the borough (dependent on how 
the London Building Stock Model is developed and when it is launched)
Potential carbon 
reductionMedium but significant wider impact to help businesses become more efficient and 
reduce running costs. Retrofit activities in small, medium and large enterprises in the 
borough could deliver up to 140GWh/year of savings by 2050.
Action Deadline Action owner Notes 
Lobby government to require EPC B for all commercial 
properties by 2035.2021 Carbon 
ManagementT o be required for 
any commercial 
properties that are 
let or sold.
Embed carbon reduction requirements within all Council 
engagement with businesses.2022 Regeneration 
/ Business 
engagement
Educate businesses and retailers in their role in addressing 
climate change. Develop guidance on integrating 
reduction of carbon emissions within commercial decision 
making.From 2021 Economic 
Development 
/ Carbon 
Management / 
Community
Identify external funding sources for non-domestic 
properties and manage distribution of funds by grouping 
similar retrofit interventions.From 2021 Finance / 
Economic 
DevelopmentTie into community 
wealth building 
principles.
Objective W2 – Engagement with ten of the borough’s largest emitters to enable and support large-scale 
projects and high-profile action.
Working with the largest emitters in the borough can make a significant impact in a relatively short period of time, 
especially as these businesses are likely to have the financial capacity to implement change.
Action Owner Carbon Management / Businesses
Cost <£5k and existing staff time to promote and engage with the big emitting businesses
Measurable metrics How many businesses set targets to reduce emissions and improvement in EPC rating 
(every 5 years)
Potential carbon 
reductionSignificant with up to 65GWh/year that would be delivered by retrofit of all large 
enterprise premises.www.haringey.gov.uk/net-zero-carbon-haringey27Action Deadline Action owner Notes 
Identify the largest ten carbon emitters within 
the borough, understand their priorities and 
business drivers.2021 Carbon 
ManagementUse results of Energy Savings 
Opportunity Scheme (ESOS) 
and EPC database to inform 
this work.
Help largest emitters to understand the risks of 
increasing energy costs and to agree targets to 
reduce carbon emissions through behavioural 
changes and retrofitting their properties. Local 
business cases will have to be made with them.2021 Carbon 
Management 
/ Economic 
DevelopmentT o start this work during the 
engagement period in 2020.
Encourage the businesses to commit to 
sustainable business practices (such as signing 
up to renewable energy, choosing sustainable 
suppliers etc). 2023 Carbon 
Management 
/ Economic 
Development
Deliver a local energy fund to encourage these 
companies to fund local carbon offsetting of 
their emissions on flights or carbon emissions.  2023 Carbon 
Management / 
Stakeholders
Objective W3 – Engagement with public bodies to support energy efficiency improvements in health and 
education public buildings across Haringey by 2034.
Public buildings larger than 250 m2 are required to have a Display Energy Certificate (DEC). The DEC register 
provides a ready list of buildings to target. As a public body, the Council is well positioned to connect with other 
public sector organisations within the borough and encourage change.
Action Owner Social Care / Education / Energy and facility managers of public buildings if in-
house
Cost External £10-12m capital cost to be secured by public bodies for retrofit of health 
and education-related buildings (high-level estimate). Government will be lobbied to 
commit to this cost.
Measurable metrics Average operational rating (DEC) across all public buildings per year
Potential carbon 
reductionFull retrofit of the sector could reduce energy consumption by around 28GWh/year .
Action Deadline Action owner Notes 
Lobby government (Department for Education, 
NHS) to ringfence funds to pay for creating a Zero 
Carbon Action Plan for all schools (see Action C1) 
and fund delivery of energy efficiency measures in all 
health and education buildings to EPC B.2021 Carbon 
ManagementThe funding could be 
in the form of a loan 
scheme (based on 
infrastructure pay-back 
terms).
Support public bodies to set targets to apply for 
funding, deliver energy efficiency improvements and 
provide technical guidance.Ongoing Carbon 
Management 
/ Asset 
ManagementThis should be integrated 
within the wider 
maintenance and repairs 
programme for schools.
Enable pooling of projects and resources to reduce 
the cost of retrofit activities.2034 Carbon 
Management / 
ProcurementStrategic Procurement 
will closely work with key 
stakeholders on a case-
by-case basis to explore 
these outcomes.Haringey Climate Change Action Plan28Objective W4 – Reduce carbon emissions by bringing all existing council-owned commercial assets to an 
average of EPC B or better by 2035.
The council has responsibility for a significant number of buildings in the borough, either through ownership and/
or operation and has a responsibility to lead by example.
Action Owner Property and facilities management / Commercial lettings / Landlord and T enant 
Functions (Commercial)
Cost Programme delivery covered by the existing Council property management teams. 
Business cases will be made on a case-by-case basis. The retrofit works need to be 
aligned with the maintenance and repair programme.
Measurable metrics Average EPC score across all Council-owned commercial properties
% of contracts of Council-owned commercial properties including a carbon reduction 
clause 
Potential carbon 
reductionSignificant and reduced energy costs for the occupiers of council commercial units. 
Opportunity to increase rents for a better unit. 
Action Deadline Action owner Notes 
Require all Council operators to report 
energy consumption data year on 
year . Set energy reduction targets in 
operating contracts, such as for leisure 
centres.2022 Property 
ServicesT argets can be set into new contracts 
or contracts up for renewal.
Specify scope of works required to 
reduce energy consumption in all 
commercial council-owned buildings 
to EPC B by 2035 (approx. 1,200 units 
across around 640 assets).2022 Carbon 
Management 
/ Property 
ServicesDiscussions have already been 
occurring between Carbon 
Management and Property Services on 
specific properties.
Group types of Council supply chain 
contracts and set out new carbon 
reduction clauses.2022 Procurement 
/ Carbon 
ManagementT o set a contract value threshold for 
this clause by type of contract.
Deliver Action Plan to improve 
properties and future lease conditions 
within the Council’s commercial 
let portfolio, mapping out future 
purchasing and selling requirements.2025 Property 
ServicesUsing the Asset Management Plan to 
inform this process.
Objective W5 – Achieving zero carbon in all new build non-residential developments 
It is expected that there will be a need for an increase of over 20% in the commercial and non-domestic 
floorspace in the borough by 2050 (GLA - London wide average).  This is a considerable opportunity to limit 
additional emissions from new developments.
Action Owner Planning policy / Carbon Management / Development Management / Housing / 
Regeneration / Businesses / Developers
Cost No additional cost to the Council, some additional cost to developers.
Measurable metrics Average % of carbon emissions saved on site in non-residential schemes permitted 
per year
Potential carbon 
reductionThis is medium to significant depending on the industry / non-domestic users’ profile. 
Reduced cost in operation and avoidance of future retrofit costs.
Action Deadline Action owner Notes
Lobby national government and GLA 
to improve fabric requirements in 
Building Regulations Part L beyond 
October 2019 proposals, before 
2025.2020 Carbon 
ManagementT o update existing SAP modelling which 
does not accurately represent carbon 
emissions in developments.www.haringey.gov.uk/net-zero-carbon-haringey29Action Deadline Action owner Notes
Deliver training for planning staff 
and proactively engage in the 
planning process to deliver policy 
requirements.By 2021 Carbon 
Management
Produce new planning guidance on 
overheating, green roofs and on-site 
carbon reduction measures, and 
update the Sustainable Design and 
Construction SPD.By 2021 Carbon 
Management / 
Planning PolicyWithin remit of existing Carbon 
Management staff.
Update the cost of carbon to a price 
that incentivises on-site reduction 
and review every 2 years.Starting in 
2020Carbon 
Management / 
Planning PolicyFirst increase to £95/tCO2 took effect 
on 1st January 2020. Further review 
underway following the publication 
of the Cost of Carbon Report by LETI 
(May 2020).
Review existing Conservation Area 
boundaries and update conservation 
area appraisals and management 
plans that enable more carbon 
reduction measures to be installed 
sensitively.From 2021 Carbon 
Management / 
Planning PolicyWithin the lobbying ask. 
Set ambitious carbon reduction 
planning policies in forthcoming 
Local Plan reviews.In line with 
local reviews. Carbon 
Management / 
Planning PolicySubject to any changes to Building 
Regulations implemented at national 
level that may restrict local powers to 
set higher standards.
Objective W6 – Supporting local business reduce their wider carbon emissions
The businesses of the borough can reduce their carbon footprint through using local supply chains, promoting 
active travel for their staff, and choosing lower carbon products. 
Action Owner Carbon Management / Regeneration / Businesses 
Cost Minor additional cost to the Council but will align with existing regeneration programmes 
and the High Streets Recovery Plan, through which funding can be secured.
Measurable metrics Number of businesses engaged on carbon reduction projects 
Potential carbon 
reductionThis is minor but this depends on the businesses level of engagement. Reduced cost in 
operations and positive public relations for the businesses. Haringey Climate Change Action Plan30Action Deadline Action owner Notes
For the Council to signpost and 
advise businesses on their role 
in carbon reduction. Promoting 
positive action through operations 
and supply chains. Enabling 
businesses to use local supply chains 
and increase community wealth 
building. By 2021 Carbon Management / 
RegenerationThis aligns with the work 
around the long-term 
sustainability of the High 
Street.  And promote 
Community Wealth Building. 
T o encourage businesses to switch 
to green energy suppliers.From 2020 Businesses
Set up a cargo bike or e-cargo 
bike delivery service trial for local 
businesses.2022 Carbon Management / 
T own Centres T eam
Increase education to encourage 
the adoption of a circular economy 
approach to their business model.From 2022 Carbon Management 
/ T own Centres T eam / 
Employment & Socio-
Economic Regeneration
For businesses to promote their low 
carbon credentials. From 2020 Businesses There are several businesses 
across the borough that 
promote their work on this. 
Promote Active T ravel to businesses. From 2022 Carbon Management 
/ Regeneration / 
Businesses
www.haringey.gov.uk/net-zero-carbon-haringey31T ransport
Overall Objective: Reduce emissions related to road transportation by 50% by 
2025, by growing public and active travel options, low-carbon transport options and 
infrastructure (e.g., EV charging stations)
3  ‘Benefits of Parking Management in London’ (August 2018) by Integrated T ransport Planning Ltd.T ransport is the third largest source of emissions in the 
borough, and private transport is associated with poor air 
quality, noise, social isolation, and health issues within the 
borough. Whilst low carbon forms of motorised transport 
do exist, there are still air quality issues associated with 
these solutions (e.g., tyre wear and braking). Furthermore, 
congestion issues are not solved by making every car 
electric. For these reasons, the Council will prioritise 
investment and delivery of public and active transport 
modes.
Cycle sharing, cycle infrastructure, parking restrictions, 
walkable streets, pedestrianisation and prohibition of 
vehicle use in some contexts can all help deliver a mode 
shift for the borough. Research indicates strongly that 
the best way to stimulate an uptake in walking and cycling 
(and a reduction in car use) is through a complementary 
package which includes both hard (new cycle lanes 
and bike storage) and soft (cycle training) measures. In 
Haringey, parking management and control schemes such 
as Controlled Parking Zones (CPZs) have helped to reduce 
the number of non-local cars (commuters and shoppers) 
in the borough. Across London similar schemes have 
helped to improve air pollution, access and accessibility and 
promote the local economy3.
It is acknowledged that dangerous driving exists on our 
roads, impacting people’s perception and experience of 
safety. These safety fears need to be overcome in tandem 
with improving people’s driving behaviour to unlock the 
necessary growth in active travel. 
There are some limitations to addressing transport emissions. It is a complex issue due to the transience of 
journeys and the fact that journeys are not necessarily 
contained within the borough. Journeys may start and 
finish outside Haringey. In addition, TfL has a high degree 
of control over public transport and key road networks, 
leaving the Council with more limited influence. T o manage 
these in a strategic manner will require the Council to work 
closely with TfL and our neighbouring boroughs.
Many of these actions are economically prudent (such as 
car clubs and active travel), create better neighbourhoods 
and are being practised elsewhere in the UK, but rarely 
all at the same time and in the same place. Furthermore, 
to deliver these will require a significant change in our 
behaviours and use of private combustion vehicles. 
This does not mean that the borough cannot set itself 
ambitious targets of shifting to cleaner , greener mobility 
solutions. Under the Climate Emergency Scenario, the 
number of journeys made by petrol and diesel vehicles 
need to decrease at a much faster rate than the 2050 
Scenario: the number of petrol and diesel journeys need 
to be halved by 2024, compared with 2032 under the 2050 
Scenario. The intention of this is to decrease emissions at 
a faster rate, as this will reduce carbon quicker and deliver 
a better highways environment faster alongside improved 
connectivity and air quality, the Council has the power to 
reduce these emissions through CPZs, reallocation of 
road space, prices of parking permits and electric vehicle 
charging deployment. It is therefore technically easier 
to mitigate these emissions than in other sectors and 
actions, such as retrofitting homes.Haringey Climate Change Action Plan32Road transport emissions
 - 20.0 40.0 60.0 80.0 100.0 120.0 140.0
2015 2020 2025 2030 2035 2041Carbon emissions (ktC O2)Transport carbon emission s
Road transpor t Non-Road Transpor t
Figure 6: Chart showing transport-related emissions in 2015 and 2041. In 2015, 127,637,566 ktCO2 was emitted; the ambition for 2041 is 3,808,360 ktCO2.
T ransport Actions
Objective T1 – Deliver a five-year sustained programme of engagement with Haringey residents to 
encourage mode shift towards public and active transport choices, with aim to achieve 88% of daily 
journeys to include walking, cycling and public transport by 2041.
This will build on existing plans and targets in the Mayor of London’s T ransport Strategy and Haringey’s T ransport 
Strategy. Timelines for interim review can be arranged to coincide with the next key business and transport 
planning horizons.
Action Owner T ransport Planning / Active T ravel / Residents and employers  
Cost Existing posts will deliver the capital programmes and scaling up which will be expected 
to deliver the Mayor’s T ransport Strategy ambition. Schemes include School Streets, 
segregated cycle lanes, Liveable Neighbourhoods, and pavement widening. Funding will 
be secured through TfL and parking charges. 
Measurable metrics Number of active transport journeys per day  
% of total car ownership in the borough
Potential carbon 
reductionSignificant as it will support air quality, noise, alongside health and wellbeing objectives. 
Combined with all other T ransport objectives, a total of 120 ktCO2 by 2041.
Action Deadline Action owner Notes 
Engage with residents to overcome the 
barriers to enable switching to active 
and zero carbon transport, including 
behavioural change methods.2021 Active T ravel The Autumn 2020 engagement 
period formed the basis to designing 
the survey.
Scale up personalised bike training and 
highways education for safe cycling, 
targeting groups less represented 
amongst cyclists (ages, locations, socio-
economic background, ethnicity, gender).  
Increasing from 1,500 residents a year 
to 2,000. Review effectiveness and 
opportunities to increase impact. Ongoing Active T ravel 
/ Cycle 
Confident 
(partner)Post-training evaluation, and 
identification of greater impact 
measures is not currently undertaken.
Engage with disability groups and 
residents to understand the needs to 
make public spaces more accessible.2021 Active T ravel 
/ T ransport 
Planning / 
Highwayswww.haringey.gov.uk/net-zero-carbon-haringey33Action Deadline Action owner Notes 
Roll out ‘T ry Before You Bike’ schemes 
for the community. Expand the bikes on 
offer that residents can try. Continue to 
promote the scheme and extend it to 
local businesses.Ongoing Active T ravel This scheme has been operating 
successfully since June 2019 and will 
now include electric and (e-)cargo 
bike elements. First aimed at residents 
and to expanded to local businesses.
Work with residents and businesses to 
design, implement and maintain parklets 
and Play Streets.Ongoing Planning/ 
T ransport 
Planning / 
HighwaysThere are approximately 50 Play 
Streets a year – aiming for 80 a year . 
Need to lobby the Mayor for one 
major road closure a year .
Lobby TfL to introduce more Zero 
Emission Bus routes to Haringey, increase 
east-to-west bus routes, smaller buses 
with shorter routes, model the road 
network with greater emphasis on public 
transport and active travel.From 2021 T ransport 
Planning / 
HighwaysCan enable this through local 
consultation.
Plan future 5-year active travel 
engagement programmes with lessons 
learnt from the first major programme.From 2026 T ransport 
Planning / 
Highways 
Objective T2 – Delivery of a 4-year programme to improve active and accessible transport infrastructure 
by 2025
The aim is to transform the borough’s active transport infrastructure so that walking and cycling become the 
most obvious and efficient modes of transport for most people living and working in the borough, and well-
integrated with public transport services for those making longer journeys. The programme should make use of 
the three redevelopment areas in the borough to establish new standards for active transport connectivity.
Action Owner Planning /T ransport Planning / Highways
Cost Annual capital investment of £16m, £64m in total. 
Cost to be met by Council and/or external funding opportunities.
Measurable metrics Km of total dedicated cycle routes delivered
Number of additional secure and covered cycle parking spaces installed
Potential carbon 
reductionMedium. Combined with all other T ransport objectives, a total of 120 ktCO2 by 2041.
Action Deadline Action owner Notes 
Lobby TfL to help fund the delivery 
of 30-60 km of dedicated cycle route 
infrastructure in the borough. 
Work with TfL to determine new strategic 
routes and the Council to connect to 
strategic routes with local routes to 
create a joined-up cycle network. 2021
Delivery by 
2025T ransport 
PlanningInclude design 
standards such as 
clear signage and 20 
mph zones.
T o include major roads 
in Haringey.
There will be a presumption in favour 
of reallocating public highway spaces 
currently allocated to private and 
business vehicles (e.g., car parks, roads, 
on-street parking) to prioritise active 
travel (wider pavements and cycle lanes) 
and green space. This would include the 
re-prioritisation of crossings in favour 
of pedestrians. T o increase accessibility 
across our neighbourhoods for all.From 2020 Highways Deliver high quality, 
accessible public 
realm and pavement 
areas to encourage 
walking, supported 
by quiet ways and 
wayfinding. Explore 
reducing on-street 
parking to one side of 
streets only.Haringey Climate Change Action Plan34Action Deadline Action owner Notes 
Scaling up safe cycle storage across 
the borough, in residential streets, in 
shopping areas and at all transport 
interchange points, including provision for 
e-bikes.2024 T ransport 
Planning / 
HighwaysInstalled based on 
local demand. 
Funded through LIP .
Develop and implement a School 
Streets programme to improve air 
quality, increase active travel, improve 
road safety and create pedestrian- and 
cycle-friendly neighbourhoods around 
the borough’s primary schools. This will 
include detailed feasibility and design of 
the School Streets, working together with 
stakeholders to consider local access 
requirements.From 2020 Active T ravel/
HighwaysAll primary schools 
in the borough have 
been assessed for 
their feasibility, a 
School Streets plan for 
the implementation 
of the first 20 
School Streets was 
approved at Cabinet in 
November 2020.
Introduce a bike hire/sharing scheme to 
the borough, including an e-bike scheme.2022 T ransport 
PlanningLondon Councils/
TfL are coordinating 
a pan-London byelaw 
that will enable the 
managing of dockless 
bike schemes.
T o explore, design and implement 
Zero Emission Zones and Low T raffic 
Neighbourhood areas. 
Review and address concerns from the 
Liveable Neighbourhoods Crouch End 
project, with view to roll out.2023 T ransport 
Planning/
Highways Low T raffic 
Neighbourhoods are 
being proposed in the 
Bruce Grove, St Ann’s 
and Bounds Green 
areas with further 
proposed in the draft 
Walking & Cycling 
Action Plan.
Aim to reduce emissions from road and 
resurfacing works, for non-road mobile 
machines through stronger planning 
policy and enforcement.From 2021 Carbon 
Management 
/ Planning / 
HighwaysIn line with London’s 
‘Low Emission Zone’ 
for Non-Road Mobile 
Machinery and policies 
to reduce idling of 
HGVs.
Consult with road safety groups and 
other relevant organisations to ensure 
highway designs are safe.From 2021 T ransport 
Planning /
Highways
Objective T3 – Develop policies and projects that disincentivise private household car use and reduce 
vehicle trips by businesses.
This aligns with the Mayor of London’s T ransport Strategy, Haringey’s T ransport Strategy (2018) and the draft 
Haringey Parking Action Plan, which has aim to discourage private car use. This can be achieved through 
expanding CPZs both in operating hours and space; reallocating road space to prioritise active and accessible 
travel infrastructure (T2); and raising parking charges.
Action Owner Highways / Residents / Businesses / Wider stakeholders 
Cost Funding for studies and management of the consultation. Cost to be met by Council. 
However , in the long term, income generation and ring-fenced for sustainable 
transport initiatives.
Measurable metrics Km2 covered in operational CPZs 
Average number of hours CPZs are operational per day
Potential carbon 
reductionMedium. Combined with all other T ransport objectives, a total of 120 ktCO2 by 2041.www.haringey.gov.uk/net-zero-carbon-haringey35Action Deadline Action owner Notes 
Lobby the government to phase out 
combustion engines by 2030.2020 Carbon 
Management
Investigate and deliver a borough-wide 
freight and last mile delivery strategy, 
focusing on hot spots in retail centres, 
with the aim to consolidate freight and 
delivery journeys.By 2022 T ransport 
Planning and 
Wood Green 
Regeneration
Assess the vehicles in the borough 
through DVLA data to understand the 
vehicle make up in terms of emissions 
in the borough. This information will be 
used to determine price bandings for 
permit and on-street parking charges. 
Revise parking charging price bandings.By 2021 Highways Ensure that any income generated 
from parking charges is ring-fenced 
into sustainable transport projects.
Whilst not currently considered viable, 
continue to review the deliverability of 
a borough workplace parking levy to 
disincentivise employee car use and 
reduce impact of commuting by car , 
except disabled people. From 2020 Highways 
and Carbon 
ManagementAny income generated from a 
workplace levy (if implemented) 
should support active travel 
measures.
T o roll out a resident led CPZ programme 
and review existing CPZs to ensure that 
they continue to meet the demands 
of residents and businesses in order to 
maximise coverage across the borough, 
reduce car usage as far as possible and 
manage visitors to the borough by car .  
While ensuring high user satisfaction, 
reducing fraud levels, and congestion 
peaks (e.g., to operate all day, events).From 2020 Highways CPZs help discourage long-term 
parking and reduce fewer vehicle 
journeys into CPZ areas. The 2020/21 
CPZ programme is prioritising the 
review of CPZs that have not been 
reviewed for a few years, assessing 
whether CPZs are effective and 
whether changes can be made, 
particularly to the 2-hour CPZs. 
Ensure that parking charging systems 
used across the borough (CPZs and P&D 
pays) reflect the needs of the community 
(residents and businesses) and wider 
environmental concerns – air quality, 
carbon, congestion and highways space. From 2020 Highways A diesel surcharge proposal will be 
presented at Cabinet in Spring 2020. 
Objective T4 – Programme to incentivise the move to low and zero emission vehicles by residents and 
businesses for people who are less able to rely on active and public transport infrastructure to move 
around
This aligns with the Haringey T ransport Strategy (2018) and draft Ultra-Low Emission Vehicle Action Plan.
Action Owner Carbon Management/Highways
Cost £50,000 over 3 years for education and awareness raising. Supporting the switch 
through tracker applications, etc.
Measurable metrics % of vehicles registered in the borough that are low and zero emission
Potential carbon 
reductionMinor . Combined with all other T ransport objectives, a total of 120 ktCO2 by 2041.Haringey Climate Change Action Plan36Action Deadline Action owner Notes 
Promote EV-related regional and national 
grants and loan systems applicable to 
residents and businesses.  Ongoing Carbon 
ManagementT o promote on the Council website, 
resident forums and business groups.
Seek to overcome barriers to EV charging 
point infrastructure for residents without 
driveways.From 2022 T ransport 
Planning / 
Highways 
/ Carbon 
Management
Give permits to car club operators to 
deliver greater percentages of electric 
fleets and promote to residents, 
businesses, and new drivers. 
Have 100% electric car club fleets in the 
borough.By 2025
By 2030Carbon 
Management
Establish a network for local businesses 
to join and access EV-related initiatives. 
This can include EV trials, e-cargo bike 
trials etc.By 2022 Carbon 
ManagementTfL support and e-cargo bikes will 
form part of the ‘T ry Before You Bike’ 
schemes.
All planning applications should include 
EV charging points where applicable 
(100% active in Wood Green and the rest 
of the borough in line with the London 
Plan). All new homes should have access 
to charging point facilities within their 
area. Ongoing T ransport 
Planning / 
PlanningSupported by Planning Advice Notes.
Objective T5 – Expand provision and accessibility of EV charging infrastructure, with up to 2,000 charging 
points by 2025 but based on levels of demand. 
This aligns with the Haringey T ransport Strategy (2018) and draft Ultra-Low Emission Vehicle Action Plan. This will 
include private and public points. TfL predicts that the demand for EV charging will require approx. 2000 points in 
public and private parking areas. 
Action Owner Carbon Management/Highways
Cost Approx. £25m private finance. Income generating and ring-fenced for sustainable 
transport initiatives
Measurable metrics Number of EV charging points installed in the borough
Potential carbon 
reductionMedium. But the switch to EVs will deliver significant improvements in air quality, noise, 
and health and wellbeing objectives.
Action Deadline Action owner Notes 
Continue to monitor EV demand across 
the borough and install charging points in 
line with this. Ongoing Carbon 
Management/
HighwaysUse OLEV data to monitor number 
of EVs; use UKPN and TfL scenario 
analyses to determine how many 
EVCPs are needed.
Use King’s College study to 
understand EV demand.
Install a variety of charging point types 
(e.g., lamp column, standard and rapid) 
in suitable locations, with a variety of 
charging point providers.Ongoing Carbon 
Management/
HighwaysWork with partners such as UK Power 
Networks and TfL to implement 
charging points.
Facilitate regional approaches supported 
by TfL to support a consistent approach 
to EV charging across London.  Ongoing Carbon 
Managementwww.haringey.gov.uk/net-zero-carbon-haringey37Energy
Overall Objective: Connect around 12,000 homes to low carbon heat sources and 
generate at least approximately 13 GW of renewable energy locally
Introduction
The carbon intensity of the national grid is falling, 
decarbonising the electricity supplied to homes and 
workplaces. The Council can further support this 
by developing and supporting low carbon forms of 
electricity generation, such as solar and wind power . 
This can be explored alongside local battery and other 
energy storage facilities – at a residential or local 
area level. This local generation will decarbonise the 
borough’s energy, but it also strengthens Haringey’s 
energy security. Renewable energy generation can be 
small scale (e.g., homes with solar panels) or can be 
large scale (e.g., large solar farms and wind turbines).In Haringey, heating traditionally relies on the 
combustion of natural gas. The efficiency of heat 
creation can be improved through the electrification of 
heating using heat pumps (air , ground or water source) 
and adoption of low carbon decentralised energy 
networks (DENs). 
The graph below shows the gap between demand 
for heat and electricity in the borough and the local 
supply of heat and electricity through district energy 
networks, solar PV and solar thermal installations. This 
gap is projected to narrow, with demand going down in 
line with the large-scale retrofit programme in homes 
and workplaces, and supply going up in line with the five 
DENs being delivered in the borough. 
T otal domestic and non-domestic supply and demand for electricity and heat
 - 200.00 400.00 600.00 800.00 1,000.00 1,200.00 1,400.00
2015 2020 2025 2030 2035 2041Total heat demand (GWhth/yr )
Total electricity demand (GWhe/yr )
Total DH + sola r ther mal su pply
(GWhth/yr)
Total DH + sola r PV  electr icity supp ly
(GWhe/ yr)Total domestic and non-domestic supply and demand for electricity and heat
Figure 7. The total supply and demand for heat and electricity between 2015 and 2041. There is a downwards trend in both total heat and 
total electricity demand, as a result of energy efficiency improvements made to homes and workplaces. T otal decentralised heat and solar 
thermal supply, and total decentralised heat and solar photovoltaic electricity supply increases.
The Council has limited influence in this sector , due to 
a signification proportion of electricity being centrally 
generated. Decentralised energy is growing, with 
smaller pockets of locally generated energy being 
supplied to smaller areas of homes and businesses. 
The National Grid predicts that decentralised energy 
will be more popular in the future, with residents being ‘prosumers’ (someone who both consumes and 
produces their own energy), with more peer-to-peer 
trading of energy of a local level.Haringey Climate Change Action Plan38Energy Actions
Objective E1 – Install renewable generation in our public spaces (e.g., Lee Valley) and review for wind 
turbines and PV solar arrays
This will contribute to the decarbonisation of the grid as well as engaging residents with renewable energy 
through installation of large-scale wind and/or solar power generation in the Lee Valley. 
Action Owner Carbon Management / Energy Managers / Stakeholders
Cost Installation of one wind turbine at £2.7m, Queen Elizabeth II floating solar reservoir 
development in west London cost £6m.
Funding mechanism/route to be determined. Subject to feasibility studies and financial 
modelling, this could offer the Council a revenue stream and could be facilitated 
through a community energy company or joint venture.
Measurable metrics kWh of renewable electricity generated annually through solar array and/or wind 
turbines
Potential carbon 
reductionSignificant, and these actions can act as a beacon for wider actions. T wo 1.5 MW 
wind turbines and 17 kWp of floating PV arrays would generate 21 MWh of renewable 
electricity a year , which totals 5.5% homes in the borough. 
Action Deadline Action owner Notes 
Conduct a feasibility study to assess the 
viability of installing two 1.5 MW wind 
turbines in Lee Valley (in terms of wind 
speeds and biodiversity impact). 2021 Carbon 
Management / 
StakeholdersCould undertake this with Thames 
Water and a potential wind turbine/
solar array provider .
Conduct a feasibility study to assess the 
viability of installing 17 kWp (160,000 m2) 
of floating PV array on Banbury Reservoir .2021 Carbon 
Management / 
StakeholdersCould undertake this with Thames 
Water and a potential wind turbine/
solar array provider .
Work with Thames Water which owns 
and operates reservoirs in the Lee Valley, 
to identify suitable locations for further 
renewable generation projects.2021 Carbon 
Management
Objective E2 – Develop a programme to encourage the installation of 20,000 PV arrays by 2041
This should target businesses, residents and landowners. Existing grass-roots action in the borough already 
making progress should be supported (e.g., en10ergy). Leadership should be demonstrated by expanding the 
installation of PV arrays on Council properties.
Action Owner Carbon Management / Stakeholders – residents and businesses 
Cost £28 m total capital investment to 2041. Cost external to the Council.
Measurable metrics kW capacity installed through schemes facilitated by the Council
Potential carbon 
reductionMedium. Emission savings will vary according to property electricity consumption and 
array size, but on average PV installation with generate around a third of household 
consumption. Roof-mounted PV on 20,000 homes will generate around 13 GWh/year . 
This will raise significant awareness. 
Action Deadline Action owner Notes 
Work with Planning to understand what kind 
of planning permission is required and/or 
whether it falls within permitted development 
rights for different types of buildings/
generation capacity. 2021 Carbon Management/
Planningwww.haringey.gov.uk/net-zero-carbon-haringey39Action Deadline Action owner Notes 
Work with community energy groups and 
other relevant organisations/groups to 
establish viable financial and delivery models 
for individuals, businesses and community 
groups for energy projects.2021 Carbon Management
Conduct feasibility assessment for all 
roofs across Haringey to determine solar 
generation capacity. This should also include 
a financial model/economic assessment to 
identify payback periods for residents and 
businesses for solar PV .2022 Carbon Management Feasibility assessment can 
be funded through London’s 
Community Energy Fund. 
London’s Solar Opportunity 
Map can also be used as 
basis.
Support existing grass-roots action in the 
borough already making progress e.g., 
en10ergy through S106 funding (Action 
Com2). Work with stakeholder groups to 
determine which projects are funded.Ongoing Carbon Management Use S106 Carbon Offsetting 
funding to financially 
support community energy.
Support local apprenticeships to carry out 
solar PV installation works.From 
2021Carbon Management 
/ Employment & 
Socio-Economic 
Regeneration / 
Procurement
Join and promote bulk purchasing schemes 
such as Solar T ogether London to achieve 
economies of scale and maximise impact.Ongoing Carbon Management
Objective E3 – Develop policies to support installation of Decentralised Energy Networks (DENs) and 
connect to zero or lower carbon heat sources
Initially this will focus on three neighbourhood level heat DENs in North T ottenham, T ottenham Hale and Wood 
Green as identified in the existing masterplan and the Council’s newly expanded DEN at Broadwater Farm estate. 
Low carbon waste heat generated by industrial processes (energy from waste, underground) should be captured 
and used to heat our homes. 
Action Owner Carbon Management / Regeneration / Housing
Cost £30m in Capital programme over 15 years for all three schemes identified in the existing 
energy masterplan (North T ottenham, T ottenham Hale and Wood Green).
Additional projects could also come forward which may increase the budget.
The Council will need to fund/arrange suitable financing for the projects; the Council 
is likely to invest in and own the infrastructure and procure or partner with another 
organisation for the design, build, operation and maintenance of the DEN but may look to 
also bring in a third party to fund/own some or all of the network.
Measurable metrics Number of homes connected to DENs
Potential carbon 
reductionSignificant. 8,000 tCO2 – because this action contributes to the removal of gas boilers 
from around 12,000 homes connected by 2035.
Almost 90% of homes will be served by heat pumps and/or low-carbon district heating by 
2050.
Action Deadline Action owner Notes 
Develop and update guidance notes to 
clearly set out the Council’s approach 
to heat networks and promote.
Implement in partnership with 
Development Management (and 
Housing / Regeneration for Council-
led development).Ongoing
OngoingCarbon 
Management / 
Planning Policy
Development 
Management 
/ Housing / 
RegenerationSetting out long-term vision and to 
include energy strategy and achieve 
planning requirements.
T o include standard design documents 
to future-proof buildings that intended to 
be connected to DENs (e.g., to allow for 
future lower temperature systems).Haringey Climate Change Action Plan40Action Deadline Action owner Notes 
Delivery of Outline Business Cases 
for initial set up of Wood Green and 
T ottenham Hale DENs.Summer 
2021Carbon 
ManagementThis will secure Council support for the 
proposed role in the projects (likely to 
include funding and owning the networks).
Completion of commercialisation for 
set-up of Wood Green and T ottenham 
Hale DENs.End 
2022Carbon 
ManagementT o include design development and 
securing planning / consents, customer 
acquisition and procurement of 
contractors to deliver infrastructure 
leading to a final investment decision in 
the projects.
Completion of construction of first 
phases of T ottenham Hale and Wood 
Green DENs.Summer 
2024Carbon 
ManagementConstruction of infrastructure to allow 
supply of heat and initial supply of heat.
Monitor opportunities for new 
networks / growth of existing 
networks / interconnection of 
networks.Ongoing Carbon 
ManagementUndertaking necessary feasibility 
work, business case preparation, 
commercialisation and delivery to secure 
additional opportunities including any 
beyond scope of currently identified 
masterplan.
Lobby government to support policy 
around delivery of DENs.Ongoing Carbon 
ManagementGovernment is developing the market 
framework for DENs.
Objective E4 – Develop a programme of technical advice to encourage the adoption of heat pumps to 
achieve an average installation rate of 2,300 homes per year. Approx. £6k per unit.
This should target businesses, residents and landowners, and can be folded into Action H3.
Action Owner Carbon Management / Stakeholders
Cost £640m external capital investment required for the installation of heat pumps.
T echnical advice for heat pumps would be captured in the provision of advice for 
privately-owned residential and commercial properties.
Measurable metrics Number of engagement activities per year (linked to H3)
Number of home visits for tailored technical advice (linked to H3)
Potential energy 
reduction79 GWh of heat supplied by heat pumps by 2050. 10% of homes will be supplied from 
gas and electric by 2050. Nearly all homes will be served by heat pumps and low carbon 
district heating.
Action Deadline Action owner Notes 
Deliver training sessions for businesses in 
local supply chains to increase knowledge on 
renewable energy and installation, and the 
importance of improving fabric efficiencies.2021 Carbon 
ManagementNeeds retrofitting of homes 
before this can be deployed.  
Provide new planning guidance with separate 
infographics for residents and businesses 
on what type of renewable energy they can 
adopt, how, and associated costs. Provide 
advice on improving the energy efficiency of 
the building and reducing draughts to support 
the efficiency of heat pumps and prevent high 
running costs.2021 Carbon 
Management / 
Planning PolicyThis will include guidance on other 
energy efficiency improvements 
and generation. It will also link to 
the DEN planning guidance work.
Explore the setting up of local pop-up advice 
centres to help residents and businesses with 
retrofitting and installing renewable energy 
technologies.2021-
2022Carbon 
Management / 
Regeneration / 
T own Centreswww.haringey.gov.uk/net-zero-carbon-haringey41Community
Overall objective: to actively liaise with and support stakeholder organisations to 
reduce carbon emissions and promote further reduction.
Generating community support
Over 90% of all borough emissions are not within direct control of the Council. Therefore, the support and delivery 
of action by wider borough stakeholders is vital to ensure delivery of this Action Plan. This means that all residents 
need to feel ownership of this ambition and feel empowered to take action. Alongside the Council, the borough 
hosts multiple active environment- and climate-related stakeholder groups who have successfully delivered a Haringey Climate Change Action Plan42range of projects; we will all need to work together to 
deliver a Zero Carbon Borough. The borough’s previous 
project and Action Plan (‘Haringey 40:20’, which 
helped decrease emissions by 40 per cent by 2020, 
compared to a 2005 baseline) gave rise to the Haringey 
Climate Forum. This group aims to deliver projects and 
review policies and projects in Haringey with regard to 
climate change. It Includes representatives from local 
sustainability groups such as the Community Energy 
Lab, En10ergy, Friends of the Earth, and the Muswell Hill 
Sustainability Group.
The Council’s role is to support these stakeholder 
groups both resource wise and financially. The Council 
has previously given community grants of £10,000 
a year to deliver carbon reduction projects. In 2019, 
projects included: double-glazing for businesses; 
installing 450 LED light bulbs in 250 homes; providing 
training opportunities with access to new careers; and 
improving pedestrian routes for schools. More details 
on these are found within the Council’s Annual Carbon 
Report. A key enabler to scaling up this support is the 
development of a Community Energy Fund, reflected in 
Action Com2 below.
The wider stakeholders’ active support will be vital to 
deliver the Haringey Climate Change Action Plan, with 
a focus on engaging with groups not yet engaged with 
and those who are not involved in climate change action 
already. This support may be secured through policy 
changes, meeting venues, publicity on projects and 
wider co-ordination. It may be through direct grants, 
but also may involve developing and co-ordinating new 
funding streams such as Community Bonds which can 
raise awareness and increase funding for projects. The Council will need to work with local youth, 
community, faith and religious groups and local 
businesses to facilitate the large-scale change required.
Supporting a local green economy
The latest Office of National Statistics assessment 
of the Green Economy in 2019 shows that the UK low 
carbon and renewable energy (LCRE) economy grew by 
6.8% to £44.5 billion in 2017, from £41.7 billion in 2016. 
With the LCRE sector now growing at around four times 
the rate of the rest of the UK’s underlying economy, this 
means that this sector in the UK economy is growing 
the fastest, and if harnessed and supported, can deliver 
benefits within Haringey through new jobs and industry. 
With increased public support and demand for a more 
sustainable environment, the LCRE sector is expected 
to continue to grow ahead of other sectors of the UK 
economy.
Green sector jobs provide services or goods that 
benefit our environment and/or conserve or restore 
our precious natural resources. Such jobs could 
increase the efficiency of our resource consumption, 
limit greenhouse gas emissions, minimise waste 
and contamination, protect, restore and enhance 
ecosystems, and contribute to climate change 
adaptation. Examples of green sector jobs may 
include renewable energy installers, energy auditors, 
retrofit assessors and project managers, retrofit 
builders, businesses that champion the circular 
economy, electric vehicle engineers, natural and low-
carbon material producers and distributers, organic 
food producers, eco-designers, ecologists and 
conservationists.
www.haringey.gov.uk/net-zero-carbon-haringey43Alongside this, to deliver the national 
government’s sustainability objectives, 
such as Air Quality and Carbon 
Reduction, there is increasing taxation 
to reduce and improve performance 
through regulation. Schemes such as 
the Ultra-Low Emissions Zone (ULEZ) 
and increasing environmental taxes 
on energy bills impact on businesses 
revenue and performance. Therefore, 
being an efficient and environmentally 
aware business will increase profitability 
and stimulate business growth. 
Protecting our ecosystems 
and biodiversity
A new objective, Com4 has been 
added to respond to feedback from 
the community. We depend heavily on the health of 
our ecosystems and biodiversity, which provide us with 
essential services, resources, but also support our 
wellbeing, health and ability to adapt to the impacts of 
climate change. Our ecosystems and species are also 
impacted by the climate emergency, so protecting our 
natural environment is as important as reducing our 
greenhouse gas emissions to fight against climate 
change. The Parks and Green Spaces Strategy will 
set out the detailed objectives and actions to protect 
and enhance our local ecosystems and biodiversity. 
Objective Com4 sets out some of the actions of the 
Parks and Green Spaces Strategy related to carbon 
reduction.
This action also aligns with the Mayor’s objective for 
London to become the world’s first National Park City 
and London’s Environment Strategy.Haringey Climate Change Action Plan44Community Actions
Objective Com1 – T o increase education and awareness raising across the borough to residents and 
businesses
Raising awareness of the impacts of climate change, and steps to mitigate, can encourage residents and 
businesses to engage with the issue and to enable behavioural change.
Action Owner Carbon Management / residents / businesses / partners  
Cost <£5k costs in delivering the actions.
1 FTE member of staff to coordinate with the stakeholders across 
Actions Com1 and Com2.
Measurable metrics Number of events supported per year
Potential energy reduction Small, but needed to unlock wider savings.
Action Deadline / 
Frequency Action owner Notes 
Use Council’s communications networks 
to increase awareness around carbon 
reduction.2021 - 
Quarterly Comms 
/ Carbon 
Management 
Support the expansion of a community-
managed web page on carbon reduction.2021 Residents 
and interest 
groups The webpage was delivered in 2020.
Attend and support at least 10 events a 
year to promote carbon reduction and 
healthier lifestyles.2021 - 
Annually Carbon 
Management / 
residents and 
partnersMany of the events were held virtually 
since the launch of the draft Action 
Plan, during the COVID-10 pandemic.
Publish performance annually on projects 
and impact on carbon reduction.2021 - 
Annually Carbon 
Management In the Council’s Constitution.
Promote the Haringey Green Homes 
Programme across the Council and 
borough network and help expand its 
remit and audience.2021 - 
AnnuallyCarbon 
Management / 
residents and 
partnersThe 2020 Green Homes Programme 
could not take place online, however , 
the Council did share the videos that 
the programme released (households 
gave a video tour of their retrofitted 
homes).
Set up a programme of community 
meetings to deliver the action plan.2021 Carbon 
Management / 
Community
Review of the HCCAP to align with 
new legislation, policy, funding and 
technological advancements.2030 Carbon 
Management
Objective Com2 - T o empower and enable community-owned projects to deliver carbon reduction
This is with aim to give the right tools to local residents and partner groups to take ownership of carbon reduction 
initiatives. This objective includes actions around lobbying to unlock funding and resources for these community 
groups to deliver action.
Action Owner Carbon Management / residents / businesses / borough partners
Cost £300k over 5 years. Community Energy Grants can be developed to support through 
Planning Carbon Offsetting in the s106. As set out by other authorities. 
Measurable metrics Amount and value of Community Grants awarded
Potential carbon 
reductionSmall. But this enables the residents and borough partners to deliver the borough 
ambition together and increase awareness. www.haringey.gov.uk/net-zero-carbon-haringey45Action Deadline / 
FrequencyAction owner Notes 
Lobby the GLA to retain the 
London Community Energy Fund 
for community energy projects.2021 Carbon 
Management
Lobby the government to bring 
back tax incentives for community 
energy groups to unlock local 
investment in energy projects.2021 Carbon 
ManagementT ax incentives such as Social Investment T ax 
Relief (SITR).
For the Haringey Climate Change 
Forum to be supported by the 
Council.Quarterly All Services Meetings are booked by Carbon 
Management, services invited to attend.
For Haringey Council to set up a 
Community Energy Fund and offer 
grants for residents and partners 
to undertake and develop carbon 
reduction projects and run low-
carbon project competitions. 2021 – 
Annual 
awardCarbon 
Management 
/ residents / 
businessesFunded through s106 monies already 
collected. The Community Energy Fund will 
be launched in 2021 following the adoption 
of the Action Plan.
Develop a local carbon offsetting 
fund for the businesses and 
community to offset their 
emissions on flights or carbon 
emissions. 2022-
2023Carbon 
Management 
/ residents / 
businessesCreate an account for businesses, staff, 
and community to support local carbon 
reduction projects.
Promote switching to a lower 
carbon energy supplier for 
residents and businesses. Ongoing Carbon 
Management / 
GLALondon Power is set up by the GLA https:/ /
mylondonpower .com/.
T o investigate the development of 
“Green Community Bonds” funded 
by the community to invest in 
carbon reduction projects.2021 Carbon 
Management 
/ residents / 
businesses
Objective Com3 - T o support the development of a skills programme, new jobs and careers in the carbon 
reduction sector
The Council has mapped the number of homes that need to be retrofitted and the measures that need to be 
implemented. On the back of this, the Council can determine how many jobs, and the type of skills needed to 
fulfil this. This will need to be supported by new training opportunities and courses. This objective will support the 
Employment & Skills Recovery Action Plan.
Action Owner Carbon Management / Economic Development 
Cost This would be dependent on government funding to deliver a new training programme 
within the borough. Upskilling our residents and growing the green economy.
Measurable metrics Number of courses being taught in the borough that upskill people to reduce carbon 
emissions
Potential carbon 
reductionSmall, but significant economic opportunities, and awareness outcomes.  
Action Deadline / 
FrequencyAction owner Notes 
Lobby national government to 
deliver an education programme 
for the new work force that 
will deliver retrofitting and new 
technologies.2021 Carbon 
Management 
/ Employment 
& Socio-
Economic 
RegenerationHaringey Climate Change Action Plan46Action Deadline / 
FrequencyAction owner Notes 
Explore the delivery of a ‘Green 
Hub’ to accommodate retrofit 
installers, provide training on a 
large scale for young people, 
re-training for people entering 
into the green sector , and training 
for people who can specialise in 
retrofitting heritage buildings. 
Enabling Haringey to be at the 
front of the new green economy 
and re-skilling jobs that will decline 
(car mechanics, boiler engineers 
etc). 2022 Carbon 
Management / 
Regeneration 
/ Employment 
& Socio-
Economic 
RegenerationThe “Green Sector” is one of the most 
sustained growth sectors of the UK 
economy.  It could deliver over 1,000 skilled 
jobs in Haringey, plus other jobs through the 
supply chain.  
Work with the Selby Centre and other local 
organisations to deliver this.
Advertise new training 
opportunities and future careers in 
the local carbon sector . 
Advertise council-owned deep 
retrofit projects as training 
opportunities for local young 
people (paid work experience, or 
apprenticeships).From 2021 Carbon 
Management 
/ Employment 
& Socio-
Economic 
RegenerationT o be embedded into tenders and 
contractual arrangements.
Develop a low-carbon volunteer 
network to promote retrofitting 
in public and private sector , with 
volunteers receiving training.From 2022 Carbon 
Management / 
Regeneration / 
Community
Objective Com4 - Deliver carbon reduction projects that support the protection and enhancement of the 
borough’s biodiversity and habitats
This is to increase the council’s ability to mitigate and adapt to climate change and address the ecological 
emergency and mass extinctions of species we are seeing globally.
Action Owner Parks and Leisure / Highways / Carbon Management / Planning
Cost This would be dependent on government funding to deliver a new training programme 
within the borough, upskilling our residents, growing the green economy and develop 
community group resources.
Measurable metrics Number of trees planted/removed 
Area of publicly accessible parks and green spaces (sqm)
Potential carbon 
reductionSmall, but significant environmental opportunities, health and wellbeing impacts and 
awareness outcomes.
Action Deadline / 
FrequencyAction owner Notes 
Increase the overall area 
of green spaces in new 
developments and through the 
delivery of pocket parks. From 2023 Planning / 
RegenerationManagement and maintenance of these 
new spaces to be taken up privately or by 
volunteer groups, where possible. The 
introduction of the London Plan’s Urban 
Greening Factor will enable this.
Increase biodiversity and 
habitat types in the borough’s 
green and blue network by 
increasing wildlife-only areas, 
and supporting biodiversity-
supporting infrastructure. From 2021 Parks and Leisure / 
Planning / Flood and 
Water Management 
/ CommunityThe management and maintenance 
implications will need to be explored with 
the relevant teams and partners. The 
introduction of the biodiversity net gain 
requirement in developments will enable 
this.www.haringey.gov.uk/net-zero-carbon-haringey47Action Deadline / 
FrequencyAction owner Notes 
Increase the level of ‘standard’ 
or ‘heavy standard’ tree 
planting across the borough in 
appropriate areas. Investigate 
the suitability of creating new 
woodland areas / arboretum.From 2021 Parks and Leisure / 
Highways / Homes 
for Haringey / 
CommunityThe council is undertaking a huge tree 
planting exercise to plant 1,000 trees in 
2021 across the borough. This takes a 
‘right tree in the right place’ approach.
Develop a means of estimating 
the potential carbon 
sequestration from trees in the 
borough.2022-
2027Parks and 
Leisure / Carbon 
ManagementT o be undertaken as part of an iT ree Eco 
survey, under the T ree & Woodland Plan.
Increase opportunities for 
local food growing through 
community-led groups, schools, 
and new developments. From 2021 Planning / 
Community-led 
groups / Schools / 
Allotment GroupsThis is to reduce transport emissions 
related to food production and supply.
Reduce emissions of the 
borough’s parks and increasing 
renewable energy generation 
through its buildings, machinery, 
vehicles and service delivery.  By 2027 Parks and 
Leisure / Carbon 
Management / 
T ransport PlanningMachinery and vehicles will be moving to 
electric, where possible. T o explore local 
solar PV on parks buildings to charge 
vehicles and tools.
Increasing the biodiversity 
of Homes for Haringey open 
spaces and road-side verges 
by reducing cutting regimes, 
identifying appropriate areas to 
deliver this, and delivering a pilot 
project.From 2022 Parks and Leisure / 
Homes for Haringey 
/ HighwaysConsider implications for maintenance 
(different kit, frequency, methods). 
Install appropriate signage 
for the public to be aware and 
educated of the purposes of the 
above projects.From 2022 Parks and Leisure / 
HighwaysHaringey Climate Change Action Plan48National and Regional Lobbying 
As recognised by the Government’s Climate Change 
Committee 6th progress report, many of the actions 
within this plan, and the decisions we make, depend on 
having supporting infrastructure and systems in place. 
Local authorities have powers or influence over roughly 
a third of emissions in their local areas. 
Therefore, the borough can only achieve the 2041 
ambition with the help and support of the residents, 
businesses, partners and wider borough stakeholders, 
with close working alongside regional and national 
government to support new powers and new financial 
mechanisms.   
Haringey’s carbon emissions are inherently linked to 
transport systems which are strategic beyond the 
borough boundary. Energy generation is governed 
at a national and regional level. Many actions in this 
plan are therefore not possible to progress without 
implementing transformative changes at a higher level 
to deal with the climate emergency that the country 
and world are facing. This list has been developed with 
input from Arup, UKGBC, developers and retrofitting 
companies, alongside Haringey residents, businesses, 
partners and wider stakeholders. 
As outlined in specific actions, the Council will actively 
be lobbying national government 
and the Mayor of London (and 
T ransport for London, TFL) to 
change policy and legislation, and 
release funding to support local 
governments, households and 
businesses in reducing their carbon 
emissions drastically.
T o do this, the Council will write 
to these bodies and publicise 
these needs whenever it can 
through formal consultation 
and engagement, and ad-hoc 
opportunities. National Lobbying Asks
National requests will be directed primarily to the 
Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy 
(BEIS) and the Ministry of Housing, Communities & 
Local Government (MHCLG):
 Æ Enforce a minimum domestic and non-domestic 
EPC rating required at point of sale and let to EPC 
B by 2035, increasing from the current EPC E and 
increase funding to enable homeowners to retrofit 
their properties to EPC B;
 Æ Cut VA T for owners, residents and business groups 
on retrofitting and renewables from 20% to 5%;
 Æ Give stronger powers and funding to the local 
authority to enforce Minimum Energy Efficiency 
Standards on private sector landlords;
 Æ Require realistic and accessible carbon emission 
modelling software in new developments that 
deliver improved fabric requirements in Building 
Regulations Part L and implement before the Future 
Homes Standard is implemented in 2025;
 Æ Adopt higher energy reduction standards than 
currently proposed in the Future Homes Standard www.haringey.gov.uk/net-zero-carbon-haringey49consultations for domestic, non-domestic existing 
and new build properties;
 Æ Support energy efficiency measures to be installed 
in buildings in conservation areas through the 
National Planning Policy Framework;
 Æ Promote reuse of existing buildings in policy before 
demolition and provide clear planning guidance on 
designing for deconstruction of new buildings to 
reduce embodied carbon;
 Æ Ring-fence funding from the Department for 
Education and NHS funds to retrofit all public 
buildings (schools and NHS buildings) to achieve 
EPC B;
 Æ Stop the sale of conventional vehicles (diesel and 
petrol) by 2030;
 Æ Bring back tax incentives and remove tax burdens 
for Community Energy Companies to unlock local 
investment in community energy projects; 
 Æ Develop a national education and skills development 
programme to develop a workforce that can deliver 
retrofitting and implement new technologies.
 Æ Remove solar PV installations from business rates;
 Æ Improve subsidies and/or funding for renewable 
energy to enable residents and businesses to resume installing renewable energy technologies, 
there is a particular need to tackling the current lack 
of subsidies for domestic properties or small-scale 
installations; and,
 Æ Expand the Salix loan scheme for public sector 
retrofitting.
Regional Lobbying Asks
Regional lobbying asks will be primarily directed at 
the Mayor of London / Greater London Authority and 
T ransport for London:
 Æ Coordinate provision of technical energy efficiency 
advice to private households across London;
 Æ TfL to introduce more and increase the rate of 
deployment of Zero Emission Buses;
 Æ TfL to model the road network and future transport 
schemes, with priority for active travel and then 
public transport;
 Æ TfL to fund the delivery of 30-60 km of cycle route 
infrastructure in Haringey;
 Æ Revise TfL funding process, by removing the bidding 
process for boroughs.  Earmark a set amount of 
funding to deliver active travel infrastructure per 
borough over a longer time period to enable large 
schemes to be forward planned and delivered;
 Æ TfL to support regional approaches to enable a 
consistent approach to EV charging across London;
 Æ Deliver a regional education and skills development 
programme to develop a workforce that can deliver 
retrofitting and implement new technologies;
 Æ For all funding from the GLA for projects and 
programmes to deliver the Zero Carbon ambition;
 Æ Develop clearer policies around the delivery of 
district energy networks and community energy; 
and,
 Æ Retain the London Community Energy Fund for 
community energy projects.Haringey Climate Change Action Plan50Delivering the Ambition
The Climate Change Action Plan is ambitious and sets 
out the level of commitment required from all partners 
in the borough – the Council, businesses, residents, 
the Mayor of London and the national government. It 
cannot be delivered by one party alone.  
Financial 
This Action Plan will be funded by the public sector , 
the private sector , and private residents. Some of this 
funding has already been secured, and some funding 
will need to be secured from the Mayor of London and 
Government, and other third-party organisations. 
Recent Government funding announcements (in the 10 
Point Plan and Energy White Paper in late 2020) should 
be taken up where possible. 
The Council will fund its own actions through its capital 
programmes and additional revenue, many of which are 
underway. Some of the Council’s costings in this Action 
Plan have been developed as estimates and will be 
worked up in detail with the relevant service areas when 
the Action Plan is progressed to the delivery stage. 
These are estimates on the amount of funding we will 
need to secure from the government and third parties 
to deliver the Climate Change Action Plan in response 
to the Climate Emergency.
Within the Council financial plan there are already 
several existing capital funding streams proposed 
that will support the delivery of this Action Plan for the 
Council to be zero carbon by 2027 and the borough by 
2041, including: 
 Æ Decentralised Energy Networks (£27m over the 
next 5 years) – which will create low carbon heat 
networks in the borough’s regeneration areas;
 Æ School Streets Funding (£3m over the next 5 years) 
– which will improve public realm and deliver active 
travel options around our schools;
 Æ Active T ravel Programme (£1.68m for 2020/21) – 
to support residents, employees and partners to 
cycle and walk more through training and education alongside infrastructure measures; 
 Æ Streetspace Plan to support active travel through 
walking and cycling (£5.1m);
 Æ Street lighting energy efficiency LED upgrade (£7m 
over the next 2 years); 
 Æ Parks and leisure facilities carbon reduction 
programme (£3m over the next 5 years); 
 Æ SME workplace intensification (£9.8m over next 5 
years) which is improve existing and deliver new low 
carbon workspace units; 
 Æ Council assets and Civic Centre improvements 
(£23m over 5 years) to deliver improvement in these 
key civic building, which will include carbon reduction 
measures; and,
 Æ Council housing energy efficiency programme 
(£101m over the next 10 years) – which will improve 
the energy performance of the Council’s housing 
stock.
There is also a proposed low-carbon funding stream 
to facilitate existing projects to go further to deliver 
increased carbon reduction. This will target corporate 
commercial property projects, where increased revenue 
can be secured. 
Projects that currently do not have funding streams 
allocated, which are proposed to be delivered in the 
medium to longer term, will be reviewed and business 
cases developed before funding can be agreed. T o fully 
deliver the ambition in this Action Plan, all new capital 
funding streams will be reviewed starting from 2020. 
These will highlight the carbon saving, and both revenue 
and capital implications will be considered. It will be 
expected that all new funding asks to the Council and 
public funding streams will deliver a positive carbon 
reduction element. Furthermore, in our lobbying of 
national and regional government, the Council will call 
for more funding to support local authorities, residents 
and businesses to achieve the borough’s ambition.www.haringey.gov.uk/net-zero-carbon-haringey51T o deliver our ambition there needs to be significant 
and sustained action by a range of other stakeholders, 
such as private homeowners and small businesses in 
the borough, which is why the costs of this scenario fall 
predominantly outside the Council’s control.  Lobbying 
and partnership work by the Council to regional and 
national government will be essential in securing 
the action needed to deliver on climate emergency 
ambitions. 
Many of the private investment by residents, businesses 
and partners will be delivered over a longer time period, 
with most being delivered as new technology and 
routine improvements take place, such as building 
improvements (replacement windows or heating 
systems), or new transport choices are considered and 
brought. T o enable this rate of change to increase, the 
Council will signpost these stakeholders to new funding, 
or enable them to make informed choices around 
payback periods. 
Governance and Future Monitoring
This Climate Change Action Plan will require robust 
governance to implement and monitor actions across 
the Council’s service areas. An important aspect to the 
governance structure is to monitor progress and ensure 
relevant service areas take ownership of progress.
All Council projects will need to demonstrate they meet 
the carbon reduction requirements as set out in this 
Action Plan through key decisions and procurement 
requirements. This plan will require senior leadership 
support at all levels.
The Council will report on progress made on this 
Climate Change Action Plan through the Annual 
Carbon Report which has been published since 2008. 
The report has previously focused on the 40:20 
commitment and will be updated in 2021 to reflect the 
ambitions set out in this new Climate Change Action 
Plan. All relevant service areas of the Council will be 
required to monitor progress through the metrics set 
out in the Action Plan.
The Council will also continue to report on the Borough 
Plan, which includes the zero-carbon ambition. 
Timeframe for Action
It is intended that the plan is a live document and will 
require updating as technology, skills, and knowledge 
moves forward. In some instances, the groundwork for 
the high impact programmes will be delivered in the next three to five years. This will enable the borough to 
deliver significant carbon reduction once fully designed 
and funding is secured.   
This current Action Plan is focusing on the known 
solutions and measures needed now. The immediate 
actions will focus on delivery over the next 7-8 years. In 
the next update of the Climate Change Action Plan the 
Council will review performance and continue to deliver 
change between 2028-2036.
Timeframe for Action - Immediate Action 
In response to the climate emergency, projects that 
have funding in place and the Council will move to 
delivery immediately include:
 Æ School Streets programme;
 Æ Streetspace Plan;
 Æ Homes for Haringey energy retrofit programme;
 Æ DEN masterplan – feasibility and planning stages;
 Æ Active T ravel Projects and Healthy Streets; and,
 Æ Delivery of a Community Energy Fund.
There are also projects that require individual action 
plans and policy changes to ensure that we deliver 
best value and meaningful outcomes, now and over 
the longer term. Over the short term, the Council will 
design these with stakeholders and plan a route map 
to support the borough’s net Zero Carbon Ambition. 
These include: 
 Æ Review of the Council’s Asset Management Plan to 
embed carbon reduction in all refurbishments and 
new buildings;
 Æ Delivery of new Zero Carbon planning policies and 
advice for all new development across the borough;
 Æ An Action Plan for the Council’s Corporate Estate 
setting out how we will become Carbon Neutral by 
2027; and,
 Æ An Action Plan for the schools of the borough, 
so that they can also move towards Zero Carbon 
Buildings.  
These actions will enable the Council to work towards 
becoming net zero carbon by 2027 and strengthen 
Haringey as a leader .Haringey Climate Change Action Plan52Timeframe for Action – Medium- to Long- T erm 
Action 
Many actions cannot be delivered by the Council. As one 
borough we need to ensure that all representatives – 
residents, businesses, partners, and other stakeholders 
understand and agree with our zero-carbon ambition. 
It will require difficult conversations as we move away 
from our current lifestyle to a low-carbon future. We 
will need to address issues such as reducing private car 
ownership, increasing the rate of private home energy 
efficiency improvements, and growing new green jobs in 
the borough.  
Once this is agreed, the Council can educate, support, 
and use its powers under local government to enable 
wider action. But the borough will need significant 
contributions and ownership from our residents, 
businesses, and partners to achieve our borough’s 
ambition. These projects include: 
 Æ Reducing the level of private car ownership in the 
borough, and increasing safe and active travel 
options for residents; 
 Æ Delivering high numbers of retrofits and improved 
energy standards in the borough’s 102,000 homes; 
 Æ Delivering high numbers of retrofits, and improved 
energy standards in the business building and units 
across the borough’s commercial portfolio; 
 Æ Repurposing the highways space in the borough to 
prioritise walking and cycling; 
 Æ Increase the amount of renewable technologies 
across the borough, including options in our parks 
and conservation areas; 
 Æ Growing the local supply chain to deliver new low 
carbon jobs and skills; and 
 Æ Delivering a wide range of communications and 
promotions to all stakeholders to normalise low 
carbon lifestyles and measures, which will increase 
significant carbon reduction. www.haringey.gov.uk/net-zero-carbon-haringey53Glossary
Annual Carbon Report - the Annual Carbon Report 
provides a transparent year on year account of progress 
made to reduce carbon emissions from the Council’s 
operations and Haringey as a whole.
Climate Emergency declaration – admitting that 
climate change exists and that the measures taken 
up to this point are not enough to limit the changes 
brought by it. The decision mandates the government 
to devise measures that try and stop human-induced 
climate change. The declaration can be made on 
national and local government level. The specific term 
‘emergency’ is used to assign priority to the topic, and 
to generate a mind-set of urgency. 
CO2 – carbon dioxide, a greenhouse gas (see below).
DEN – Decentralised Energy Network. A DEN is a 
system of highly insulated pipes that move energy in 
the form of hot water or steam from where it is created, 
to where it is needed for use in space heating and hot 
water production. A DEN has the potential to provide 
energy in a more efficient (and lower carbon), cost 
competitive, and locally secure and environmentally 
beneficial manner , over conventional energy supply.
EV – Electric Vehicles.
EPC – Energy Performance Certificate. A requirement 
under The Energy Performance of Buildings 
(Certificates and Inspections) (England and Wales) 
Regulations 2007 for properties to have a valid EPC 
(valid for 10 years) when the property is rented or sold. 
The EPC provides an indicative rating for the energy 
efficiency of the property (rating A to E, with E being the 
worst) and an indicative rating for retrofit improvements 
that could be made. 
GHG – greenhouse gas. These gases contribute to 
climate change directly through their greenhouse 
effect by trapping heat in the atmosphere. Seven 
GHGs are listed under the Kyoto Protocol which have 
different impacts on global warming; carbon dioxide 
(CO2), methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O) are naturally 
occurring GHGs, and hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), 
perfluorocarbons (PFCs), sulphur hexafluoride (SF6) and 
nitrogen trifluoride (NF3) are human-made GHGs.
GLA – Greater London Authority (comprising the Mayor 
of London and London Assembly).
Green energy – additional, certified power generated 
by renewable sources (by the Government definition of 
renewable). IPBES - Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on 
Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services, who published a 
Global Assessment report in 2019.
IPCC – Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 
who published a special report in 2018 on the impacts 
of global warming of 1.5 degrees Celsius.
Haringey 40:20 - Haringey 40:20 was inspired by the 
passion of local residents who convinced Haringey 
Council to join the Friends of the Earth ‘Get Serious 
about CO2’ initiative and adopt an ambitious target to 
reduce CO2 emissions in the borough by 40% by 2020. 
Haringey 40:20 brings together residents, businesses, 
social enterprises, charities and community groups 
across Haringey to help to create a better future for 
everyone living and working in the borough.
Liveable Neighbourhoods – A funding programme 
initiated by T ransport for London for long-term 
schemes that encourage walking, cycling and the use of 
public transport. Liveable Crouch End is the first of such 
schemes in Haringey. 
PV – photovoltaics, also known as solar panels. PV is 
a technology that converts sunlight into electricity 
through its solar photovoltaic cells.
Retrofitting – modifications to existing buildings to 
improve its energy efficiency and/or decrease energy 
demand.
ULEZ – Ultra Low Emission Zone. Vehicles need to 
pay a charge if they do not meet the ULEZ emissions 
standards.
Zero Carbon – A very energy efficient building or area 
which may have on-site renewable power generation. 
This will reduce carbon emissions to a minimum.  Where 
emissions do occur , emissions can be offset through 
mechanisms which could include buying green power 
for the remaining energy demands. Developing a Power 
Purchase Agreement (PPA), PPA for out-of-borough 
renewable energy sources, and / or planting of trees 
each year to offset emissions (these would need to be 
certified independently and benefits quantified), etc.Haringey Climate Change Action Plan54