1 |  LBTH Net Zero Carbon  |  March 20  |  Rev A
London Borough of Tower Hamlets
March 2020| Rev ANet Zero Carbon PlanNet Zero Carbon
Council District
by 2025 by 2050
2 |  LBTH Net Zero Carbon  |  March 20  |  Rev ALBTH Net Zero Carbon Plan Net Zero Carbon Tower Hamlets  | Executive summary
The science is clear
Climate change is happening and needs to be urgently slowed down 
to avoid terrible consequences. Business as usual is not an option to 
solve this crisis.
A Net Zero Carbon Council by 2025
In March 2019, Tower Hamlets Council declared a climate emergency. 
The Council is now aiming to be Net Zero Carbon by 2025. This report 
shows that it is possible but that it will require decisive action starting 
now to reduce direct emissions by 75%. The residual emissions will 
have to be offset.
A Net Zero Carbon Borough by 2050
This report also recommends that Tower Hamlets Council uses its 
powers, influence and leadership to put the Borough on the right track 
to achieve Net Zero Carbon by 2050 (or earlier if possible). 
Net Zero Carbon is possible
This report demonstrates that it is technically possible to achieve Net 
Zero Carbon. This would require decisive strategic decisions from 
Tower Hamlets Council in 8 key areas shown on the adjacent diagram.
This would also require significant investments, although there is a huge 
potential to combined them with regular maintenance and replacement 
cycles.
The Council should also develop an approach to offset the residual 
emissions. Some solutions (e.g. social housing retrofit, investment in 
additional renewable energy capacity) are possible in 2025 but not 
acceptable in the long term. By 2050, residual emissions in the UK will 
have to be less than 10% of what they are now, leaving only a 
marginal role for offsetting by increasing plant cover, for example 
tree planting.
Our approach for real emission reductions
To allow the council to see how to effect emissions this report 
categorises emissions by use type. This means emissions are assigned 
based on the ability to affect change.
All calculations show total greenhouse gas emissions (CO2e) and all 
reductions refer to this, however for accessibility and simplification we 
refer to ‘carbon’ throughout the report. By this we mean carbon 
dioxide which contributes by far the majority of greenhouse gas 
emissions in the borough.
Breakdown of borough carbon emissions by use type, showing the 
categorisation and proportion of emissions from each source, and the 
control the Council has over each sector.3 |  LBTH Net Zero Carbon  |  March 20  |  Rev ALBTH Net Zero Carbon Plan
-400-20002004006008001000120014001600Total annual greenhouse gas emissions from LBTH (ktCO2e)Offset
F-gases*
Aviation*
Industry
Forestry and land use
Transport
Waste*
Other metered energy
Buildings and towns
-4-2024681012Annual greenhouse gas emissions (ktCO2e/yr)Required offset
Transport
Street lighting and other small
external uses
Buildings & Landlord areasZero Carbon Tower Hamlets  | Executive summary
Net Zero Carbon Council by 2025
The current total carbon emissions under the Council’s direct control are 
10 ktCO2e/year and are dominated by buildings. External energy 
use (e.g. street lighting) and transport also represent significant 
sources of emissions. 
There is considerable potential to reduce emissions very significantly 
by 2025: a target of 75% carbon reduction should be set, bringing 
the estimated annual emissions to 2.5 ktCO2e/year.
The residual emissions will need to be offset, and suitable offset 
mechanisms are discussed in the report. 
Key actions include:
Power
Install 20,000 sqm PVs on the Council’s non-domestic buildings
Start with the largest roof areas. The targeted installed capacity should be at least 4.2MW.
Renewable power
Ensure that electricity supply to all the Council’s assets is on a 100% renewable tariff or Power Purchase Agreement
Buildings
Start retrofitting existing buildings owned and operated by the Council (e.g. Council’s offices) 
Retrofit heat pumps, use energy management to reduce energy use, improve building energy efficiency: insulation, improved 
airtightness and better windows, install Mechanical Ventilation with Heat Recovery (MVHR) wherever possible, install PVs. An 80%
carbon reduction on-site should be achieved for full retrofit projects, or a plan put in place to achieve this.
Transport
Replace the Council’s diesel and petrol cars with electric cars and vans
Accelerate the replacement cycle so that 95% of the Council’s cars and vans are electric by 2025
Replace the Council’s lorries with cleaner options when they become available
The aim is to have 30% of the Council’s lorries as low emissions by 2025.
Install electric charging points for the Council’s fleet
Waste
Target a 70% recycling rate for waste from all Council buildings by 2021
Forestry, land use and agriculture
Change diets
Reduce the meat content and increase vegetarian choices of food served on Council owned premises.Net Zero Carbon Borough by 2050
The current carbon emissions from the whole borough are 1,600 
ktCO2e/year.
The ‘Net Zero’ report by the Committee on Climate Change articulates 
what the UK will need to do to achieve Net Zero Carbon by 2050. The 
London Borough of Tower Hamlets would need to implement these 
solutions. We estimate that a minimum 90% reduction in carbon 
emissions should be achieved (ideally lower). The total residual 
emissions would need to be lower than 150 ktCO2e/year.
Key actions include:
Power
Achieve a total PVs capacity across the whole of the borough of 430 MW (equivalent to 1,500,000-1,900,000 sqm)
Buildings
Phase out gas boilers and gas-fired CHP
Stop the installation of any new gas boilers from 2020. Stop the installation of new gas-fired CHP immediately. Switch to low 
carbon heat (e.g. heat pumps). Gradually phase out gas for heating and cooking in the borough. 
Net Zero Carbon new buildings from 2025
Mandate ultra-low levels of energy use in new buildings. This is through setting a kWh/m2total energy target, and a space heating 
demand target in line with Passivhaus (15 kWh/m2). Buildings should also use low carbon heat and have on-site renewable energy 
(e.g. PVs). 
Major retrofit programme with ambitious energy objectives
90% of existing homes and buildings should have benefited from low energy retrofit by 2050 (by 2030 for Tower Hamlets homes, 
schools leisure centres). An average heating energy demand of 40kWh/m2/yr should be achieved for retrofit homes. Low carbon 
heat should replace gas boilers.
Transport
99% carbon reduction from cars and vans
All domestic and light goods mileage should be completed by electric vehicles or equivalent by 2050.
80% carbon reduction from lorries
HGV emissions reduced by 50% through reduced journeys, switch to rail, and developing hydrogen or electric drivetrain 
technologies.
Reduce air travel 
To meet zero carbon ambition the number of flights from the UK should reduce by more than 80% unless alternative technologies can 
be found.
Waste
Waste reduction and circular economy
64% reduction in emissions from waste in line with ‘further ambition’ recommendations by the CCC.Current Current 2025 2050
Total annual greenhouse gas emissions from the London Borough of Tower Hamlets 
as a whole LBTH for the last reported year (2018) and the required emissions for 
Net Zero Carbon in 2050Total annual carbon emissions from Tower Hamlets Council for the last reported 
year (2018) and the required emissions in 20254 |  LBTH Net Zero Carbon  |  March 20  |  Rev ALBTH Net Zero Carbon Plan Listening to the voices of experts
The Committee on Climate Change
The Committee on Climate Change is an independent, statutory body 
established under the Climate Change Act 2008. Its purpose is to 
advise the UK Government and devolved administrations on emissions 
targets and report to Parliament on progress made in reducing 
greenhouse gas emissions and preparing for climate change. 
The Committee on Climate Change published its report “ Net Zero: The 
UK’s contribution to stopping global warming ” in May 2019.  Some 
of the key recommendations of the report include:
•A Net Zero greenhouse gas emission target is not credible unless 
policy is ramped up significantly.
•Delivery must progress with much greater urgency.
•Clear leadership is needed, right across Government, with delivery 
in partnership with businesses and communities. 
The National Grid
Each year the National Grid issues its Future Energy Scenarios. Its 
analysis aligns with the Committee on Climate Change.  It concludes 
that strong policy actions [to wholly decarbonise electricity supply and 
improve energy efficiency of new and existing homes] must be taken 
and there is no room for delay.
World Health Organisation
The World Health Organisation published “COP24 special report: 
health and climate change” in 2018.  It states that the severity of the 
impact of climate change on health is becoming increasingly clear and 
that the drivers of climate change – principally fossil fuel combustion –
pose a heavy burden of disease. The costs of this ill health and 
disease represent in turn a heavy economic burden.  The report states 
that “the most recent evidence indicates that the health gains from energy 
scenarios to meet the Paris climate goals would more than meet the 
financial cost of mitigation at global level ”.
Extinction Rebellion
Extinction Rebellion is a movement that uses non-violent civil 
disobedience to highlight the urgency of the climate change crisis. 
Their key demands are: 
1. Tell the truth about the climate and ecological emergency
2. Act Now 
3. Hold a citizen’s assembly on climate and ecological justice“Reaching net zero carbon emissions 
by 2050 is achievable . However, 
this requires i mmediate action 
across all key technologies and 
policy areas.”  
National Grid
Future Energy Scenarios, 2019“Delivery of greenhouse gas emission 
reductions must progress with far 
greater urgency ”
Committee on Climate Change
“Net Zero” Report, 2019
“If we don't take action, the 
collapse of our civilisations and 
the extinction of much of the 
natural world is on the horizon”
David Attenborough
at the UN Climate Summit, 
Poland, 2018
“Economic valuation of health gains 
would tip the balance decisively in 
favour of more aggressive climate 
mitigation.”
World Health Organisation , 
“COP24 special report: health and 
climate change”, 2018
5 |  LBTH Net Zero Carbon  |  March 20  |  Rev ALBTH Net Zero Carbon Plan
•The climate emergency
•Energy and the electricity revolution
•Understanding the Council’s emissions
•Understanding the Borough’s emissions
•What will happen if no action is taken
•The case for acting nowWhere are we now?
6 |  LBTH Net Zero Carbon  |  March 20  |  Rev ALBTH Net Zero Carbon Plan The climate emergency and Zero Carbon
The science is clear
Climate change is happening and needs to be urgently slowed down 
to avoid terrible consequences.
The most recent international negotiations on Climate Change 
concluded with the Paris Agreement in December 2015. This 
Agreement reaffirms global ambition to limit temperature rises to 
below 2°C and binds every country to produce national plans to 
reduce emissions. The agreement also contains a further collective 
aspirational goal to reduce emissions in line with keeping the 
temperature increase to 1.5°C. 
The Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5°C (SR15) was 
published by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) in 
October 2018. It highlighted the urgency of the situation and the need 
for decisive action in the next 10 years.
National commitment
In May 2019, the Committee on Climate Change published its ‘Net 
Zero report’ and set out the ambitious aim of phasing out carbon 
emissions in the UK by 2050. The Government adopted the 
recommendation of this report and the Climate Change Act was 
amended in June 2019 to reflect this ambition: achieving net zero 
emissions by 2050.
In addition, the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial 
Strategy (BEIS) has set the Buildings Energy Mission, with the objective 
of halving the energy use of new buildings by 2030.
Tower Hamlets declaration of climate emergency
In March 2019, Tower Hamlets became one of the first councils in the 
country to declare a climate emergency. One of the associated 
commitments is for Tower Hamlets to aim to become a zero carbon or 
carbon neutral Council by 2025. 
Public calls for action
Since October 2018, there has been a surge in civil society’s interest 
and action on climate change. The Schools strike movement started by 
Greta Thunberg and civil disobedience from Extinction Rebellion are 
requesting action and truth from those in a position to act. We have to do everything we can to reduce global warming to less than 1.5ºC
In March 2019, Tower Hamlets became one of the first councils in the 
country to declare a climate emergency
The UK Government has committed in June 2019 to 
Net Zero emissions by 2050
Greta Thunberg, the Schools strike movement and Extinction Rebellion 
are calling for action now7 |  LBTH Net Zero Carbon  |  March 20  |  Rev ALBTH Net Zero Carbon Plan Energy and the electricity revolution
The decarbonisation of the grid
Electricity used to have a very high carbon content: more than 1,000 
gCO2e/kWh in the early 1970’s. It has become steadily ‘greener’ 
since, although it reached a plateau of approximately 500 
gCO2e/kWh during the 2000’s. At that time, heating systems using 
gas such as boilers and especially CHP were seen as environmentally 
friendly options.
This has now changed completely: the de-commissioning of coal-fired 
power stations and the rise of renewable energy (particularly wind 
and solar) have meant the annual average carbon content of 
electricity is now around 150-200 gCO2e/kWh and predicted to 
reduce more in the next decade (see adjacent graph).
The National Grid’s Future Energy Scenarios
The National Grid produces a set of future energy scenarios every 
year. These are used to facilitate the understanding of how the UK’s 
electricity generation mix could develop. 
We focused on the two scenarios which can meet (or be close to 
meeting) the UK climate change targets: the ‘Two Degrees’ and the 
‘Community Renewables’ scenarios. 
As the ‘Two Degrees’ scenario relies on a large proportion of new 
nuclear energy plants and as there is a significant degree of 
uncertainty for new nuclear plant financing, our recommendation is to 
consider the ‘Community Renewables’ scenario as the most likely.
This scenario assumes that around 70% of annual electricity demand in 
2050 will be met by wind and solar power. 
BEIS and HM Treasury projections
BEIS and HM Treasury have also published their projections for the 
future carbon content of electricity, which show good agreement with 
the ‘Community Renewables’ scenario.
What it means in practice
We have used these sources to predict the future carbon content of 
electricity over the next 30 years, e.g. 
136 gCO2e/kWh in 2020
108 gCO2e/kWh in 2025
27 gCO2e/kWh in 2050. 
Our calculations have taken into account the changing carbon content 
of electricity, while gas was assumed constant at 216 gCO2e/kWh.The carbon content of electricity has fallen in the last few years and will continue to decrease.
Unfortunately, the carbon content used in Part L 2013 of the Building Regulations has not been updated.The four National Grid Future Energy Scenarios (© National Grid)
High level assessment of the four National Grid scenarios Community Renewables: what it means in terms of power generation in the UK over the period 
2020-2050: the rise of renewable energy‘Consumer Evolution’ Discounted
Not compliant with avoiding 1.5˚C warming
‘Steady Progression’ Discounted
Not compliant with avoiding 1.5˚C warming
‘Two Degrees’ Discounted
Relies on nuclear capacity increasing from 9GW in 
2018 to 17GW in 2050. Not considered realistic as 
three of six proposed new nuclear projects have been 
cancelled, nuclear has consistently failed to attract 
private investment and electricity prices are higher than 
those for onshore wind, offshore wind and solar 
photovoltaics.
‘Community Renewables’ Considered
Etude assume this scenario offers the most plausible 
1.5˚C compliant UK electricity generation mix pathway. 
This scenario was developed to achieve the UK’s now 
outdated Climate Change Act target of an 80% 
reduction in emissions by 2050.010020030040050060070080090010001100
1970 1980 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050Grid Emission Factor (gCO2e/kWh)MTP (2010)
UK CCC (2013)
Drax Electric Insights (2019)
National Grid (2019) 'Community Renewables'
National Grid (2019) 'Two Degrees'
National Grid (2019) 'Steady Progression'
National Grid (2019) 'Consumer Evolution'
Natural Gas
050100150200250300350400450500
2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050Electricity Generation (TWh)
Interconnectors Waste Biomass Coal
Gas Nuclear Hydro Marine
Offshore Wind Onshore Wind Solar Other Renewables8 |  LBTH Net Zero Carbon  |  March 20  |  Rev ALBTH Net Zero Carbon Plan
A breakdown of the influence the Council has over sources of emissions in the borough. Note: diagram not to scaleCouncil and borough emissions: the Council’s power and influence
Direct Council emissions
Tower Hamlets Council’s direct control emissions only cover the 
following sources: 
1. The buildings the Council occupies (owned or rented)
2. Landlord areas in rented buildings e.g. Tower Hamlets Homes 
communal lighting, building-based pumping for communal heating
3. The Council’s fleet and business travel
4. Street lighting and other external public uses e.g. CCTV, markets, 
parks. 
The Council’s ability to influence
The Council has however significant power and influence to be able to 
affect greenhouse has (GHG) emissions beyond its own operations to 
the borough as a whole. 
Responsibility
These include schools and leisure centres in Tower Hamlets (also 
including a small number of nurseries) and all dwellings managed by 
Tower Hamlets Homes (excluding landlord areas).
Policy
Well crafted policy is a key change driver. It has significant ability to 
reduce carbon emissions from new developments, limit the destruction 
of natural habitats and increase nature and biodiversity within the 
borough.
Leadership
Tower Hamlets Council is in a position of leadership.  It holds great 
power to drive change through the procurement processes it is 
involved in, through activities it will and will not allow to take place 
within its jurisdiction, and through partnerships with other key players 
in the borough, such as Canary Wharf, Queen Mary University, TfL 
and the NHS.
Facilitation
The public and local businesses look to Tower Hamlets for leadership 
and guidance. The Council could become a trusted advisor and leader 
in the climate crisis through the provision of support to the public and 
businesses in reducing their carbon footprint and engendering more 
sustainable and ethical behaviour.
9 |  LBTH Net Zero Carbon  |  March 20  |  Rev ALBTH Net Zero Carbon Plan Understanding the Council’s direct emissions, and those under its responsibility 
The Council’s ‘ direct control ’ carbon emissions are dominated by buildings; emissions from 
landlord areas represent a non-negligible partEmissions under the Council’s ‘ direct control ’ and ‘responsibility’ (including those from Tower Hamlets 
Homes, schools and leisure centres) are much more significant than those under its direct control only. 
They need to be addressed as well.
The Council’s own emissions and those under its responsibility represent approximately 3% of the 
total Borough emissionsDirect emissions are dominated by buildings
Buildings owned and/or occupied by the Council represent the 
majority of its direct control emissions, followed by emissions from 
external areas and from landlord areas (e.g. staircase lighting, 
presumably mostly in housing blocks). 
After buildings, the Council’s vehicle fleet is the largest source of direct 
emissions; the majority from lorries.
Emissions under the Council’s responsibility are 
significant and need to be addressed
Emissions from Tower Hamlet Homes are more than three times  higher 
than the total of those directly controlled by the Council from buildings 
and transport. There are approximately 11,500 THH dwellings . They 
are mainly EPC D-rated (42%) and E-rated (32%). No THH energy 
consumption data is available, therefore it was estimated using the 
Ofgem national average. It should be noted that EPCs are a poor 
indicator of actual energy consumption.
Schools and leisure centres also represent a significant source of 
emissions. Schools are spread over 73 sites, with 11 responsible for 
over 50% of emissions. 
Emissions are reported by user, inline with the CCC
The Green House Gas reporting protocol defines a methodology for 
organisations to report emissions arising from their activity. It defines a 
convention to ensure that emissions are not double counted by 
different organisations, and identifies responsibility based on the root 
sourceof emissions. 
Here we have taken a different approach, reporting the carbon 
emissions that the Council is responsible for based on use. This gives a 
more robust strategy to target reducing emissions, and is in line with 
the Committee on Climate Change approach to national emissions 
reporting.
The Council can influence further savings in the 
borough
The Council’s direct greenhouse gas emissions account for only 1% of 
the Borough’s emissions, and 3% when also accounting for those under 
its responsibility e.g. emissions from THH, schools and leisure centres. 
However, the Council also has some influence over a proportion of 
Borough-wide emissions for example through planning and transport 
policy, waste collection policy, and stakeholder engagement.
The target is for the Council’s ‘direct control’ emissions to achieve Net Zero Carbon by 2025 Current 2025 205010
ktCO2e/yr
ZeroCurrent carbon 
emissions for the 
whole boroughCurrent carbon emissions 
under the Council’s 
responsibility (e.g. Tower 
Hamlets Homes, Schools, 
Leisure Centres)Current LBTH Council 
‘direct control’ carbon 
emissions
 - 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50
Total estimated Council GHG
emissions in 2018Annual carbon emissions (ktCO2e/yr)Transport - Unknown vehicle and/or fuel
Transport - Fleet - Lorries
Transport - Fleet - Vans
Transport - Fleet - Cars
Transport - Business Travel - Cars
Street lighting and other small external uses
Landlord electricity for communal heating
Landlord uses e.g. staircase lighting
Non-domestic Buildings
 - 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50
Total estimated Council GHG emissions in
2018: direct control + responsibilityAnnual carbon emissions (ktCO2e/yr)Transport - Unknown
Transport - Business travel
Transport - Fleet
Responsibility - Leisure centres
Responsibility - Schools
Responsibility - THH
Street lighting and other small external uses
Landlord electricity for communal heating
Landlord uses e.g. staircase lighting
Non-domestic Buildings10 |  LBTH Net Zero Carbon  |  March 20  |  Rev ALBTH Net Zero Carbon Plan
-4-2024681012
Total estimated Council
GHG emissions in 2018`Forecast 'business as usual'
Council's emissions in 2025Total required Council GHG
emissions in 2025 for net
zero carbonAnnual carbon emissions (ktCO2e/yr)Required offset
Transport
Street lighting and other small external uses
Buildings & Landlord areasCouncil’s direct emissions  |  Closing the Carbon Gap
Carbon gap analysis
The Council’s emissions are already expected to reduce between now 
and 2025 due to a combination of factors
•Management of assets e.g. disposal / moving out of inefficient 
buildings, in particular Mulberry Place and the associated move 
towards a lower carbon new Town Hall. The Council may dispose / 
move out of other buildings but we have currently only accounted 
for Mulberry Place.
•Carbon policy measures from the Council (e.g.  retrofitting, 
energy management, and tree planting) and from Government, as 
well as market-driven changes (e.g. uptake of electric vehicles). 
This is estimated to lead to a 10% reduction in building’s carbon 
emissions by 2025, and a 30% reduction in emissions from cars 
and 10% from vans (by switching to EVs and hybrid vehicles).
•Decarbonisation of the electricity grid: as the carbon content of 
every unit of electricity used continues to decrease, emissions 
associated with electricity will reduce without any action from the 
Council.
The Council can and must do more, and faster
Overall, under the current “business as usual” trajectory, it is 
estimated that by 2025 the Council’s direct control emissions would be 
approximately 40% lower than currently. 
Unfortunately, this is more than twice higher than what they need to 
be if the Council is to achieve a 75% carbon reduction and offset the 
residual emissions in order for the Council to be zero carbon by 2025. 
Actions required to deliver this objective are provided in this report.
This analysis focuses on the Council’s direct control emissions. When also 
accounting for emissions under the Council’s responsibility (e.g. Tower 
Hamlets Homes, leisure centres and and schools), the gap would 
significantly increase.
Switching Town Hall from Mulberry Place to the new Town Hall is a large part of the expected reduction by 2025 
(based on planning stage carbon predictions for the new Town Hall) (© AHMM)The carbon gap by 2025: estimated direct control emissions accounting for current carbon policy, stock 
management, and electricity grid decarbonisation will be lower than current emissions… but not low 
enough. 
2025 Carbon GapBusiness as usual
Net Zero Carbon target11 |  LBTH Net Zero Carbon  |  March 20  |  Rev ALBTH Net Zero Carbon Plan
-400-20002004006008001000120014001600
Total borough GHG
emissions in 2016Forecast total borough GHG
emissions in 2050Total required borough
GHG emissions in 2050 for
net zero carbonTotal annual carbon emissions from LBTH (ktCO2e)Offset
F-gases*
Aviation*
Industry
Forestry and land use
Transport
Waste*
Other metered energy
Buildings and townsUnderstanding greenhouse gas emissions from the borough as a whole
Whole borough greenhouse gas emissions
The emissions for the borough as a whole are estimated to represent 
approximately 1,600 ktCO2e/yr. The size of the challenge to reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions is clearly shown. Although emissions are 
already forecast to reduce (see ‘business as usual’ bar), this drop is 
almost entirely due to decarbonisation of electricity. As the rate of 
national grid decarbonisation slows in the late 2020’s the borough 
emissions are shown to level unless more actions are taken.
Emissions are categorised by sector in a similar way to 
national reporting by the CCC
The categories used are the same as those used by the Committee on 
Climate Change for national reporting. The building sector has been 
split between known building emissions, and unknown additional 
metered energy, mainly electricity.
Emissions are dominated by buildings and commercial 
electricity use
Current emissions are dominated by heating in buildings , and 
electricity use . As the carbon content of electricity reduces the 
importance of reducing heating demand , switching to low carbon 
heat (for example heat pumps) and electrifying transport become 
increasingly important.
The contribution from road transport has been calculated on a per 
capita basis from the total London emissions.
The contribution from aviation has been calculated on a per capita 
basis from the total national emissions.
There is a big gap between business as usual and what 
is required for Net Zero Carbon by 2050
With the introduction by LBTH of required improvements over Part L at 
planning, the London Plan for larger developments (minimum 35% 
reduction over Part L + offset payments), the Ultra Low Emission Zone 
(ULEZ), and changes to the electricity grid there are already drivers 
for reducing emissions. However including an estimate of the effect of 
these changes in forecasting shows a considerable shortfall when 
compared to a zero carbon target. A step change in ambition and 
action is required.Latest reported emissions (2016) and forecast 2050 emissions based on a business as usual scenario 
with no major changes in policy. Emissions are currently set to reduce by 30% over the next 30 years, 
but are significantly higher than could be offset and so higher than what is required for net zero 
carbon. A net zero carbon scenario is shown for comparison.Historic and forecast business as usual greenhouse gas emissions from the London Borough of Tower 
Hamlets between 2005 and 2050 showing a target trajectory for Zero Carbon in line with a 1.5C 
warming scenario. There is a large gap between the reduction likely due to the current rate of 
change and trajectory, and what is required to achieve Net Zero.
Photo of housing stock, Canary wharf, server room?
1. MHCLG, Ministry of Housing Communities and Local Government; EPCs, Energy Performance Certificate database gives 
building attributes such as floor area and a modelled energy consumption; DECs, Display Energy Certificates give actual 
metered energy consumption for a sample of non-domestic buildings; VOA, Valuation Office Agency issue a periodic 
database of non-domestic buildings and energy consumption.
2. Net Zero: The UK’s contribution to stopping global warming (2019) Committee on Climate Change
The large additional electrical consumption metered in Tower Hamlets is likely to be from server 
rooms and trading floors in Canary Wharf. These are not reported on building Display Energy 
Certificates (DECs). Image courtesy Green CoolingEtude carbon emissions forecast
Etude have developed a tool to forecast local emissions based on bottom up analysis for 
buildings and transport to show what effect current policy and potential policy changes for 
each building or vehicle type could have on the total emissions. 
The bottom up analysis has been calibrated using building stock information from MHCLG 
housing stock, EPCs, DECs, and VOA information1. Reduction from other categories is 
estimated using the national CCC ‘core’ reduction estimates and local considerations2. 
The estimates for buildings can be compared to the total electricity use from BEIS 
subnational metered data. Etude estimates that over three quarters of electrical consumption 
in Tower Hamlets is likely to be from uses not related to buildings. This is significantly larger 
than other London boroughs and therefore may be linked to intensive commercial office use 
such as server rooms. The estimated split has been shown as ‘Other metered energy’. Business as usual
Net Zero Carbon target
05001,0001,5002,0002,5003,000
2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050Green house gas emissions (ktCO2e)
Potential policy gap
Historic emissions
Baseline emissions including growth
Target trajectory
Business as usual12 |  LBTH Net Zero Carbon  |  March 20  |  Rev ALBTH Net Zero Carbon Plan
Electrification of vehicles 
and heat
Reduced emissions
PM 2.5
PM 10
NO2The case for acting (now)
The rate of change
The climate is warming. Sea level rises, the reduction of ice sheets and 
warming of oceans are happening at a rate faster than IPCC 
predictions, and projections have consistently underestimated the rate 
of climate change in each of their major reports since 1990. Urgent 
action must be taken now. 
Co-benefits
Many of the solutions proposed for reducing carbon emissions in Tower 
Hamlets have a positive effect on other important issues. For example:
•Improved air quality – phasing out of petrol and diesel powered 
vehicles on our roads and gas boilers in our buildings will reduce 
local air pollution. This will result in improved health of the 
population, a reduction in avoidable premature deaths and 
savings for the NHS. 
•Fuel poverty / housing health / equality – improving the energy 
efficiency of homes also reduces fuel poverty, reduces inequality 
and improves health.
•Job creation – commitment to climate change mitigation and 
adaptation will create new and sustainable jobs.
•Green infrastructure / biodiversity – Preserving green space and 
creating more woodlands and wetlands not only acts as a 
significant carbon sink, it also creates habitat for animals, birds 
and insects, and valuable leisure amenity for people.
The solution is not to offset carbon
To achieve the global reduction in greenhouse gas emissions required 
to limit global temperature rises to 1.5˚C, it is not enough to simply 
offset emissions of one area by reducing them somewhere else.  
Where it is possible to reduce greenhouse gas emissions locally or 
nationally this must be done. 
Carbon offsetting, done well, can play an important short term role 
by funding land restoration, tree planting, energy efficiency measures 
and additional renewable energy capacity. However the focus 
should be on eliminating reliance on fossil fuels and reducing 
emissions in the first place .
Carbon Capture and Storage may also have a place for mopping up 
unavoidable emissions from very hard to treat sectors such as certain 
industry niches. However the technology is unproven, expensive and 
must not be relied upon to justify business as usual.
Fuel poverty benefits of reducing emissionsThe role of offset changes over time. Initially it can be used to fund projects for carbon reduction 
that might otherwise not have taken place. By 2040 to 2050 the only offsetting possible will be 
actual additional carbon reduction.Health benefits of improving local air quality by reducing emissions
“I am firmly of the view that the next 18 months will decide our 
ability to keep climate change to survivable levels and to restore 
nature to the equilibrium we need for our survival. “ 
HRH Prince CharlesPoor air quality from the combustion of fossil fuels has a big impact on human health.
The Royal College of Physicians estimates that 40,000 premature deaths are caused 
by air pollution in the UK. 
Public Health England estimates that between 2017 and 2035 there will be 2.5 
million air pollution related diseases costing the NHS £18 billion to treat.
“Confidence is very high that the window of opportunity – the period when 
significant change can be made, for limiting climate change within tolerable 
boundaries – is rapidly narrowing. ”
IPCC’s Special Report on Climate Change and LandMore walking and cyclingBetter urban planning
Less 
respiratory 
diseaseBetter health 
and quality of 
life
Fuel poverty affects 1 in 10 households in the UK.  Solutions to fuel poverty, can also 
be solutions to climate change. 
Insulating homes – improving the insulation and airtightness of existing homes 
reduces the amount of energy required to keep them warm, thereby reducing fuel 
costs and CO2emissions at the same time. 
Renewable energy – Renewable energy has decreased in cost year on year and is 
predicted to continue to decrease.
Insulating homes
Reduction in 
damp and 
mouldRenewable energy
Cheaper energy billsReduced 
energy 
demandCheaper energy
Improved 
healthCarbon offsetting can 
be used to accelerate 
carbon reductions 
beyond the Council’s 
control (e.g. social 
housing)
Residual emissions from hard 
to treat sectors offset by 
carbon sinks2050 20252019CO213 |  LBTH Net Zero Carbon  |  March 20  |  Rev ALBTH Net Zero Carbon Plan
Becoming a Zero Carbon 
Council by 2025
•A closer look at the Council’s direct emissions
•Decarbonising non-domestic Council buildings
•The electrification of the fleet
•Action plan
-4-2024681012Annual carbon emissions (ktCO2e/yr)Required offset
Transport
Street lighting and other small
external uses
Buildings & Landlord areas-75%
Offset should not represent more than 25% of 
current emissions
Total estimated 
‘direct control’ 
Council greenhouse 
gas emissions in 
2018Required emissions 
and offsets for a 
Net Zero Carbon 
Council in 202514 |  LBTH Net Zero Carbon  |  March 20  |  Rev ALBTH Net Zero Carbon Plan A closer look at the Council’s direct emissions
A detailed understanding is required
A detailed assessment is important in order to identify priority actions 
and opportunities. We have used granular data as much as possible 
(e.g. metered energy use reported by CRC reports, mileage). 
Non-domestic buildings
The largest emitters are the Council’s Town Halls and offices. Emissions 
from landlord areas are also significant, but spread over a large 
number of sites. While there are over 500 sites, 13 buildings are 
responsible for over 50% of these emissions. 
Of the known floor area, just over 75% is heated by gas. 
Energy benchmarking indicates the potential for 
significant energy and carbon savings 
Where possible, average energy consumption was estimated for the 
main Council building types. For the majority, this indicates high 
energy consumption compared to CIBSE benchmarks, i.e. the potential 
for significant energy consumption savings. This is taken into account in 
the recommended actions . 
Transport: Council’s fleet and business travel
Transport emissions are from the Council’s fleet, in particular its lorries 
which are mostly on diesel. There is only one hybrid and no electric 
cars. A large proportion have unknown vehicle type and fuel.
Current renewable energy generation
There is currently no known renewable energy generation (e.g. solar 
photovoltaics) on the Council’s buildings.Current breakdown of the Council’s non-domestic building-based emissions.
The total in 2018 is estimated at 7.3 ktCO2e/year .
(please note that Tower Hamlets Homes, schools and leisure centres are not ‘direct control’ 
emissions. They are covered in the following section.
Current breakdown of transport emissions per vehicle type.
The total in 2018 is estimated at 1.4 ktCO2e/year .
They are dominated by those from lorries, both due to miles travelled and type of fuel usedProportional representation of carbon emissions from non-domestic buildings (each block is one 
site, except the lighter, bottom left block which groups several hundreds of the smaller ones); 13 
buildings cover over 50% of building emissions; they include the Town Hall and many Idea stores 
/ libraries
Current breakdown of the Council’s emissions from external uses.
The total in 2018 is estimated at 1.2 ktCO2e/year .
They are dominated by street lighting.
Town hall and Council 
offices
Nurseries, Children’s centres, Sure 
starts, etc.
Libraries,
IDEA stores
OthersUnknownLandlord uses (excl 
heating)Landlord - electricity 
for communal heating
Street lighting Other external lighting -
NOT streets, NOT parks -
sport pitches, car parks 
etcParks - excl buildings i.e. 
lighting, pumping, toilets 
etcPublic WCs
CCTVMarkets (incl supply to 
stallholders)
Unknown / misc utilities1 = Mulberry Place Town Hall – expected to reduce once it is replaced by the new Town Hall (the resulting expected 
reduction is shown as hashed area on the graph); 2 = John Onslow House; 3 = Albert Jacobs House; 4 = Jack Dash House
Business travel - Cars
Fleet - lorries
Fleet - vansUnknown vehicle 
and/or fuel15 |  LBTH Net Zero Carbon  |  March 20  |  Rev ALBTH Net Zero Carbon Plan
012345678910
Total estimated Council GHG
emissions in 2018Total projected Council GHG
emissions in 2025Annual carbon emissions (ktCO2e/yr)Street lighting and other small
external uses
Buildings & Landlord areasDecarbonisation of non-domestic buildings and other stationary uses
Target: 80% on-site carbon reduction by 2025 
At this initial estimate stage, we recommend targeting a 80% on-site 
carbon reduction from buildings and external energy uses by 2025. 
This is considered the maximum realistic on-site saving. With further 
grid decarbonisation, this would be equivalent to 90% on-site 
reduction by 2050. 
Improving the energy efficiency of existing buildings
Benchmarking indicates a significant saving potential through energy 
management and efficiency. We recommend a target of 50% 
reduction in energy consumption , in line with the BEIS energy mission, 
to be achieved by 2025 for Council buildings, street lighting and most 
other stationery sources. 
This should be achieved by improving the building fabric (insulation, 
airtightness), its services (ventilation, lighting, energy management) 
and, crucially, switching away from gas heating towards low carbon 
heat (e.g. heat pumps).
Phasing out gas use
The majority of buildings should switch to a low carbon supply. 
Crucially, we have assumed that 95% of gas-heated buildings will 
switch to a heat pump system by 2025.
Buildings currently served by district heating schemes (assumed to be 
on gas) should change to a low-carbon heat supply, whether Council-
led or in partnership with energy suppliers, e.g. with TfL to utilise 
waste heat from the tube, with Canary Wharf occupiers to utilise heat 
from servers. 
Installing PVs
High-efficiency PVs should be installed on the Council’s buildings. As an 
indication, installing PVs on 25% of the roof areas would represent 
20,000 sqm or PVs, or 4.2MW. All roofs should be investigated, but 
the large ones first. In addition, approx. 20,000sqm PVs (or 4.2MW) 
should be installed over external areas (e.g. car parks or markets. 
Standards for new buildings
All new buildings should be Net Zero Carbon buildings .
Different approaches for different building types 
For smaller and simpler buildings such as community centres, landlord 
areas etc, the Council could develop standard carbon reduction 
packages of measures to be deployed.Estimated strategy to 2025 decarbonisation of Council buildings and other stationery uses (direct control emissions)
Low carbon heat – We have assumed that 95% of the Council buildings will switching to heat 
pumps by 2025PVs on all large Council buildings’ roofs – for example, the transport / depot sites have 
significant roof areas, and potentially car park areas, which lend themselves well to large PV 
installations: Vehicle Testing Station, Blackwall (left); Car Pound (middle); Toby Lane depot 
(right).
-80%
Total estimated ‘direct 
control’ Council GHG 
emissions in 2018Total targeted ‘direct 
control’ Council GHG 
Emissions in 2025
Gas boilers Heat pumps16 |  LBTH Net Zero Carbon  |  March 20  |  Rev ALBTH Net Zero Carbon Plan Case study  |  IDEA Stores
Two representative buildings
The Idea Stores selected as case studies are located in different types 
of building of different ages; for example, Cubitt Town Library is in a 
Grade II Listed Building, whereas Bow Idea Store is located in the 
ground floor of John Onslow House, a 4-storey office building of 
relatively modern brick construction (1990s). Both were selected as, in 
principle, all existing buildings will need significant refurbishment to 
achieve a zero carbon borough. This may include recently completed 
buildings.
Each building counts
Establishing a whole building retrofit plan for each Idea Store that 
identifies the key changes required is recommended. This would 
include improvements to the building fabric for all buildings, as 
reducing heating energy use is a primary aim. The greatest 
improvement in carbon emissions will come from changing the 
heating system to low carbon heat sources (heat pumps). For these to 
be cost effective in operation, it is also important that the building 
fabric performs well, and air leakage is low .
In some cases, some flexibility and innovation may be needed to 
ensure that Heritage buildings can be preserved as functioning spaces 
in a Net Zero Carbon Borough.
Three initial surveys – an Infrared Thermography (IRT or thermal 
image) survey to identify the main deficits in insulation, an Airtightness 
test and a structural survey to establish whether the roof can be used 
for Photovoltaics – will form the foundation of the plan for each 
building.
Investment in Council buildings is required
These refurbishments can be carried out over an extended period of 
time, but will be a challenging requirement for an already financially 
constrained service. Additional funding for upgrading buildings is 
required.
To give an idea of the scale of investment required, 
•Cubbit Town Library would require an investment of £200k-£410k
•Bow Idea Store would require an investment of £200k-£1MCubitt Town Library
Cubitt Town Library - 650m2
Triple glazing where Heritage concerns allow –
secondary glazing otherwise£130-250/m2GIFA
Thermal imaging survey and airtightness test to check 
insulation and air leakage and carry out 
repairs/remedial works where needed.Imaging survey – low cost
Remedial works - cost dependent on scope 
Add insulation to all walls and insulation overlay on floor. 
External wall insulation where possible and internally 
elsewhere.Walls – £70-100/m2GIFA depending on 
specifications and finish level
Insulate the roof internally Approx. £10/m2GIFA
Upgrade the lighting throughout to LED £20-£120/m2GIFA depending on whether relamping 
only or new light systems
Replace the existing boiler with a low carbon heat pump £80-£150/m2GIFA depending on heat demand and 
on need for wider system upgrades (e.g. radiators).
Total £330 to £630/m2GIFA (indicative) 
Bow Idea Store – 1000m2
Review the existing cooling system in the entire building 
and upgrade to a heat recovery based system with 
centralised time and temperature control. Install/improve 
heat recovery in mechanical ventilation systems£25-30/m2GIFA for new AHU and controls
£40-50/m2GIFA  for new high efficiency chiller
£150-200/m2GIFA for new fan coils and ventilation 
ducting
Replace the existing boiler with a low carbon heat pump 
or – preferably - integrate with the mechanical system£100-120/m2GIFA  – savings available by 
avoiding new chiller costs (see above) 
Triple glazing to the single glazed curtain wall £200-500/m2GIFA (depending on extent of curtain 
walling)
Upgrade the lighting throughout to LED £20-£120/m2GIFA depending on whether 
relamping only or new light systems
Carry out a thermal image survey to check insulation and 
air leakage and carry out repairs/remedial works where 
neededImaging survey – low cost
Remedial works - cost dependent on scope 
Totals £200 to +£1000/m2GIFA 
(indicative) depending on scope
Bow IDEA Store Bow IDEA Store – list of suggested changes to improve carbon performance
(Total building area is 5500m2)Cubitt Town Library - list of suggested changes to improve carbon performance17 |  LBTH Net Zero Carbon  |  March 20  |  Rev ALBTH Net Zero Carbon Plan
Scope for improvement
The ‘best practice’ benchmark energy performance for library buildings 
in the UK is around 30% better than Cubitt Town Library and 60% better 
than the Bow Idea Store. This shows that there is significant room for 
improvement in terms of energy use reduction.  As a guideline, the target 
should be to approximately halve the energy consumption in each 
building in order to achieve the overall target of an 80% on site carbon 
reduction.
Cubitt Town Library
From a brief initial visual survey, key building features include:
•Solid wall construction with single glazing
•Gas fired boiler – fairly recently changed from oil
•Natural ventilation
•Old fluorescent lighting throughout
The priorities for carbon reduction therefore include:
•Focus on fabric – improve insulation, airtightness and ventilation 
strategy
•Replace the lighting as part of routine maintenance work
•Change the existing boiler to a heat pump within 10 years
Bow Idea Store
From a brief initial visual survey, key building features include:
•Substantial single glazed curtain walling
•Mechanical ventilation
•Mechanical cooling. From the air conditioning inspection report 
(dated 2017), there are/have been some issues with the system 
controls
•The current electrical consumption at Bow is high. Other Idea Stores 
do not have a similar profile, so it is probable that the air 
conditioning system and direct electric heating are the principal 
reasons
The priorities for carbon reduction therefore include:
•Replacement windows with triple glazing and a draft lobby
•Review mechanical services to ensure air handling units for 
mechanical ventilation have heat recovery and review 
heating/cooling controls
•Complete lighting overhaul to include LED fittings
•Review building insulation – is there any cavity wall insulation? 
Retrofit full fill cavity wall injection and improve airtightness.
Jon Onslow House is one of the highest carbon emission buildings in the 
Tower Hamlets portfolio. Therefore, although some issues could be 
addressed for the Idea Store in isolation, a comprehensive review of the 
whole building may give a much better overall emissions reduction.Current energy consumption of Bow IDEA stores and Cubitt Town Library vs best UK practice Current CO2emissionsvs what the proposed actions can achieve at Cubitt Town Library
050100150200250300
Bow Idea Store Cubitt Town Library Best PracticekWh / m2
Current CO2emissionsvs what the proposed actions can achieve at the Bow IDEA store0102030405060
Bow Current Bow ProposedkgCO2e/m2/year0102030405060
Cubitt Current Cubitt ProposedkgCO2e/m2/year
80% reduction
80% reduction
Diagram showing the cost involved and the energy savings possible (© Investment Property Forum, 2017.  
Costing Energy Efficiency Improvements in Existing Buildings, Currie & Brown)Energy use Carbon emissions
Carbon emissionsCase study  |  IDEA Stores
18 |  LBTH Net Zero Carbon  |  March 20  |  Rev ALBTH Net Zero Carbon Plan Electrification of the Council’s fleet
Image of current latest commercially available electric car © Nissan
An electric vehicle charging point integrated with a lamp post on a UK street. Chargers that do 
not offer debit/credit card payment should be avoided if possible, as these may be phased out by 
legislation.Target:  a 50% carbon reduction by 2025
a 85% carbon reduction by 2030 
These are recommended targets for the Council’s fleet and business 
travel vehicles, at this initial estimate stage. Electrification of transport 
will not only bring significant carbon savings, but also important co-
benefits including air quality, noise, and reduced contribution to the 
urban heat island. 
Electric vehicles
Electric vehicles use 80-90% less energy than those powered by fossil 
fuels, due to the efficiency of electric motors and their ability to brake 
regeneratively. A typical electric vehicle charged in the UK currently 
produces around 32-43g CO ₂per km; for a typical electric car this 
would reduce to just 13-17g CO ₂per km by 2030 and 4-5g CO ₂per 
km by 2050, thanks for further decarbonisation of electricity. This 
compares to an EU average of 121g CO ₂per km for petrol and 
diesel cars sold in 2018. 
It is recommended that the Council procures pure electric vehicles 
rather than hybrid vehicles . Where pure electric vehicles are not yet 
available it may be better to wait rather than to purchase hybrid 
vehicles, which are mechanically more complex and expected to be 
made obsolete by advances in battery technology in the next few 
years. 
Accelerating the natural replacement cycle
Cars and vans. All cars and van trips should be made by electric 
vehicles by 2025, leading to 90% reduction in emissions. We have 
assumed that the normal replacement cycle is 7 years. To limit 
wastage it is important that the Council immediately stop purchasing 
petrol and diesel vehicles where viable electric alternatives are 
available
Lorries. We recommend engaging with manufacturers early; this could 
be done in partnership with other councils to send strong signals to the 
market and stimulate product development. A 30% reduction in 
carbon emissions by 2025, and a 70% reduction by 2030 are the 
recommended target.
Fleet management should prioritise the of electric vehicles use over the 
others. 
Charging infrastructure
The Council should develop a strategy with UKPN and other 
stakeholders to identify the most appropriate locations and types of 
charger. It is recommended that a combination of slow (3kW) and fast 
(7-22kW) chargers be installed.Carbon pathway for 2018-2025-2030 showing decarbonisation of the Council’s fleet and 
business vehicles
Efficiency of battery electric vehicles vs combustion engine and hydrogen vehicles 
© Committee on Climate Change
0.000.200.400.600.801.001.201.40
2018 2025 2030Annual carbon emissions (ktCO2e/yr)Transport - Unknown
vehicle and/or fuel
Transport - Fleet -
Lorries
Transport - Fleet -
Vans
Transport - Fleet -
Cars
Transport - Business
Travel - Cars
19 |  LBTH Net Zero Carbon  |  March 20  |  Rev ALBTH Net Zero Carbon Plan
-4-2024681012
Total estimated Council
GHG emissions in 2018Required emissions and
offets for Net Zero Carbon
council in 2025Annual carbon emissions (ktCO2e/yr)Required offset
Transport
Street lighting and other small
external uses
Buildings & Landlord areas-75%
Recommended Strategy 2020 - 2030 2030 - 2040 2040 - 2050
Reforestation or 
afforestation   
Housing retrofit in 
Tower Hamlets   
Solar photovoltaic 
panels in Tower 
Hamlets  
Renewable energy 
outside of LBTH  Residual emissions
LBTH Council’s residual ‘direct control’ emissions and required offsets in 2025 DRAX Power Station is operating a Bioenergy with Carbon Capture and Storage pilot project, 
capturing just 1 tonne of CO2per day.
Reforestation and afforestation are currently the only commercially available options for 
removing carbon emissions from the atmosphere.Quantifying the residual emissions 
We have estimated that the Council will have to reduce its direct 
control emissions by 75% by 2025, down to approximately 
2.5ktCO2e/year. These residual emissions will have to be offset for 
Tower Hamlets Council to be ‘Net Zero Carbon’.
Residual emission allowance
The Committee on Climate Change indicates that in a net zero 
scenario, residual emissions in 2050 should be no more than 3% of 
current emissions across the UK . Over 80% of residual emissions in 
2050 are forecast to occur in the aviation, agriculture, industry and 
waste sectors. 
This means that acceptable residual emissions in other sectors such as 
buildings and transport within Tower Hamlets are almost zero. 
Strategies to address residual emissions
Forestation offers the only practical strategy to remove atmospheric 
carbon. Total potential is very limited, therefore emissions must be 
reduced as much as possible first. In Tower hamlets the total potential 
tree planting will only make up a very minor fraction of the offset 
requirement, therefore trading with other local authorities will be 
required.
Housing Retrofit in Tower Hamlets to fit heat pumps and improve 
building fabric efficiency can reduce emissions and fuel poverty, while 
improving air quality. It cannot reduce atmospheric carbon however.
Solar Panels fitted to buildings in Tower Hamlets use sites that have 
already been developed to provide cheap and clean electricity that is 
essential to power heat pumps and electric cars. It also cannot reduce 
atmospheric carbon.
Renewable Energy funded by LBTH but installed on greenfield sites 
outside of the borough contributes toward decarbonisation of the 
electricity grid. It also cannot reduce atmospheric carbon.
Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS) . Drax power station is amongst a 
handful of Bioenergy with Carbon Capture and Storage pilot projects 
worldwide, which the CCC view as an essential technology. It is 
currently capturing just 1 tonne of CO2per day however, so is not a 
viable option at present.
Potential strategies to offset residual emissions in LBTH and whether they should be used in the short 
term, medium term and/or long term
Offset should not represent more than 25% of 
current emissions in 202520 |  LBTH Net Zero Carbon  |  March 20  |  Rev ALBTH Net Zero Carbon Plan Becoming a Net Zero Carbon Council by 2025  |  Action plan (1/2)
Acting now
This page summarises the actions recommended in the following areas. 
The Committee and Climate Change categories have been used to 
ensure consistency with the national ‘Net Zero Carbon’ plan.
Power
Buildings
Transport
21 |  LBTH Net Zero Carbon  |  March 20  |  Rev ALBTH Net Zero Carbon Plan Becoming a Net Zero Carbon Council by 2025  |  Action plan (2/2)
Acting now
This page summarises the actions recommended in the following areas. 
The Committee and Climate Change categories have been used to 
ensure consistency with the national ‘Net Zero Carbon’ plan.
Waste
Forestry, land use and agriculture
Other sectors
Organisational readiness and commitmentWaste
Conduct a waste inventory to understand better where Council waste comes from, so that a recycling target for waste from all Council buildings 
by 2021 can be set
Once this is understood, explore ways to minimise the waste generated, look for alternatives for any non-recyclable waste.Waste team to tender for external expertise to undertake waste 
inventory by October2020.
Introduce food waste bins in all office areas
Achieving a target of zero organic waste to landfill by 2025 will require a behavioural shift in the way we do  things. Food waste bins should be 
collected daily and placed in a centralised location ready for collection.Facilities management & Waste team to review feasibility by April
2020.
Target exemplary levels of recycling of waste materials from Council construction projects
A minimum target of 95% should be set and the proportion of energy recovery should be minimized over time.Housing and regeneration team to set new waste requirements by 
March 2020. 
Grow waste and circular economy awareness
Take responsibility for knowing where the waste from the borough is going, and what happens to it.The Council’s waste strategy covers the circular economy and 
should be used.
Forestry, land use and agriculture
Tree planting schemes
Increase tree planting on Council owned land and parks; carry out surveys to establish where trees can be planted. It is not possible to plant enough trees 
to meaningfully offset total emissions, so as many trees as possible should be planted.Programme to plant 1,000 new street trees (by 2021) is under 
way. Community tree planting projects to commence in 2020.
Other sectors
Procurement of goods and services
Procurement and Sustainable Development Team to review councils procurement policies and tender documentation by May 2020 to ensure carbon 
emission requirements are incorporated as part of all relevant new contracts. Procurement and Sustainable Development Team to review councils 
procurement policies and tender documentation by May 2020 to 
ensure carbon emission requirements are incorporated as part of 
all relevant new contracts. 
Base refrigerant selection in cooling systems used by the Council on a principle of ‘lowest available Global Warming Potential (GWP) refrigerant’. Technical Services have information available  to review .
Organisational readiness and commitment
Create and resource a Zero Carbon team 
The team, part of the Sustainable Development Team, will have responsibility for implementing the Zero Carbon Roadmap, collect and monitor CO2
emissions data. Sustainable Development Team to make proposal for overall 
ownership, leadership and delivery of Zero Carbon target by 
February 2020. Where necessary and internal climate change 
taskforce will be set up with the responsibility to accelerate 
change.
Collect data on energy and CO2from Council operations, reporting annually Zero Carbon Team to undertake assessment in October 2020.
Develop the Carbon Reduction Action Matrix 
Implicate and involve all services for maximum impact and reach. Adjust the Matrix of actions developed by Etude.Zero Carbon Team to update Carbon Reduction Action Matrix by 
March 2020.
Create internal policies on waste, procurement and travel that are aligned with overall 2050 objectives
Internal policies guide Council staff on targets for waste, procurement and travel and give weight to initiatives developed. Each team (Waste, Procurement, Transport) to update their 
policies to refer to Zero Carbon22 |  LBTH Net Zero Carbon  |  March 20  |  Rev ALBTH Net Zero Carbon Plan Decarbonisation of buildings: the importance of energy management
The important role of energy management
In order to achieve this ambitious Net Zero Carbon target it is crucial 
to understand current energy use consistently and track its evolution 
over time.
This is essential to provide a real estimate of the savings, the impact of 
changes and budget required. Our estimate of current emissions is 
based on energy consumption from the CRC1reports which is twice 
that in the NI 1852and GHG reports.
The Council should put in place a robust energy management system 
as the foundation of its journey to zero carbon . Based on our analysis 
of current energy data and reporting procedures, this should include:
1. Reviewing the list of buildings / sites and their annual 
consumption, and update it if required e.g. redundant sites, mis-
allocated uses, missing floor areas, etc. 
2. Floor areas must be included to allow benchmarking
3. Attributing a unique ID to each site, alongside its address and 
postcode, to avoid ambiguity and mis-allocation. 
4. Reviewing metering provision and frequency of meter readings: 
except on the very small sites, this should be monthly, and with 
half-hourly meters on the large sites. 
The energy management system should be linked with asset 
management, so that carbon decisions are informed by the future life 
of the asset, and take into account the impact of changes in building 
use.
Once current energy use and emissions are known with more 
certainty, we recommend the carbon action plan should be 
expressed in absolute terms as a carbon budget (e.g. tonnes of CO2
until 2025, tonnes of CO2per year) rather than the current approach 
using relative (%) targets. 
Dedicated resources 
This will require additional resources (staff, training and 
soft/hardware).
Depending on the type of sites, this would best be carried out by site 
teams or centrally, but there should in any case be some analysis and 
support by the central team.
1Carbon Reduction Commitment (CRC)
2Under National Indicator NI 185, local authorities are required to calculate the 
carbon emissions of their buildings and services on a yearly basis and report the 
results to DEFRA. Illustration of possible system for energy and carbon reporting and management: ideally the system would be online and as automated as possible in order to avoid errors from manual entries; it should allow the Council’s 
carbon lead to track overall progress and to look into individual sites, with links to the responsible parties for each site and with the asset management team; it should cover all sites, both under the Council’s direct control 
and under its responsibility. The level of information illustrated here is higher than in the current reporting systems: essentially, it combines the information provided in the NI-185 sheets and CRC reports. The experience of 
creating this zero carbon roadmap suggests this level of information is required for effective carbon management. 
23 |  LBTH Net Zero Carbon  |  March 20  |  Rev ALBTH Net Zero Carbon Plan Becoming a Net Zero Carbon Council by 2025  |  Optimising cost
Improving the ambition of the planned works represents a fantastic opportunity to minimise costs A clear trajectory
To minimise the capital cost of achieving net zero carbon it is important 
that a strategic approach is adopted which builds on the opportunities 
presented by estate and asset management events. These might 
include: 
•Reduce- reduction in estate size through agile working 
implementation delivering estate, energy and carbon savings 
together with improved productivity.
•Renew- investment in new estate and disposal / redevelopment 
of poor quality estate. These events present a major opportunity to 
achieve net zero carbon standards.  It should be noted that 
improved performance is not a given though and will depend on 
the quality of design, construction and commissioning.  Also, the 
embodied carbon impact of the development should be considered 
and minimised.
•Improve- investment to improve the quality of existing assets (e.g. 
replacing aged cladding or heating system) presents a very 
significant opportunity to make significant performance gains for 
little additional cost.
•Enhance– significant savings can be achieved by addressing 
backlog maintenance and through enhanced management regimes 
with improved monitoring of performance and building setup
A costed plan is required that covers each Council asset, prioritising 
those with the greatest impact and where there is a significant 
improvement opportunity, for example large buildings with poor 
performance and those with forthcoming investment. Research has 
shown that, where refurbishment is already planned, additional 
investment of just £50/m2can achieve very carbon savings of over 
400 kgCO2/m2 over 15 years together with significant savings in 
running costs compared to ‘like-for-like’ renewals.
For large poorly performing assets that are to be retained, 
consideration should be given to bringing forward planned investment 
cycles to energy and carbon secure savings and improved building 
performance. Programmes such as London RE:FIT can help to enable 
such investments by guaranteeing the associated energy savings that 
underpin the investment case.  
A costed investment plan should detail the timetable for improving the 
standard and management of existing assets, together with clear 
specifications and standards for new assets including buildings, 
vehicles or IT systems.  This approach will leverage existing council 
expenditure to help deliver a substantial part of the necessary 
investment. Item Planned work Improvement opportunity
Monitoring Limited / none other than visual 
inspectionIRT survey to identify improvement 
opportunities 
Install energy monitoring and targeting 
system to larger buildings 
External 
envelope None / cosmetic redecorations Sealing eaves and install draught 
stripping to doors
Increase loft insulation
Additional insulation to cavity walls
Windows Replace end of life single 
glazing with new double glazed 
unitsReplace single with high performance 
glazing (triple)
Mechanical 
VentilationReplace end of life AHU fans 
with similar systemInstall best in class AHU fans and add run-
around coil
Clean and repair ductwork
Lighting Replace T5 bulbs like for like Use LED lamps for all replacements and 
add daylight and presence controls in all 
rooms
Air conditioning Inspection and servicing of 
terminal units and replacement 
of any that are faultyInstall new EC drives in terminal units
Replace refrigerant to one with GWP
Add new controls to check performance 
and calibration
Heating Inspection / balancing of 
radiators and service to boiler
Replace boiler with new more 
efficient plantInstall ASHP rather than new gas boiler
Review radiators sizes, increase only were 
needed (or use FCU’s for heating also) 
and add TRVs where absent
Change circulating pumps
Renewable 
EnergyNone Install PV arrayCOST
Baseline Maintenance
Maintenance for Zero Carbon 20252025Plant replacement 
brought forward to 
meet the 2025 DeadlineIn the medium term, the 
lower annual cost of the 
more robust low carbon 
technologies recoups the 
early capital outlay 
required to meet the 
2025 deadline
Cumulative operating costs – 15 years
Cumulative energy costs – 15 years
2025Plant replacement brought 
forward to meet the 2025 
Deadline results in a sharp 
reduction in energy costs
Baseline Annual Energy
Energy for Zero Carbon 202524 |  LBTH Net Zero Carbon  |  March 20  |  Rev ALBTH Net Zero Carbon Plan
Phasing out carbon 
emissions in Tower Hamlets 
by 2050
•A comprehensive set of actions
•Timeline: a long and ambitious journey
•LBTH Zero Carbon pathway
•Decarbonisation of domestic buildings
•Case study: a typical existing block of flats
•Focus on policy
•Focus on procurement
05001,0001,5002,0002,5003,000
2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050Green house gas emissions (ktCO2e)Decarbonisation of electricity
Energy efficiency of buildings
Decarbonisation of heat in buildings
Electrify transport
Push industry and waste further, reduce flights and car use
Offset required
Target trajectory
Forecast emissions reduction25 |  LBTH Net Zero Carbon  |  March 20  |  Rev ALBTH Net Zero Carbon Plan A comprehensive set of actions
Wide-ranging actions
This diagram illustrates the key areas of actions for reducing carbon 
emissions in Tower Hamlets towards:
1. A Net Zero Carbon Council by 2025
2. A Net Zero Carbon Borough by 2050
Actions are required in all key sectors:
•Buildings 
•Power
•Waste
•Transport
•Forestry and land use
•Industry
•Aviation
•F-gases
Actions can be split up between in different categories, depending on 
the scale of control Council has over the emissions:
•Direct Council control (e.g. Council’s offices)
•Responsibility (e.g. Tower Hamlets Homes, Schools), Policy(e.g. 
local plan) and Leadership (e.g. engagement with local businesses 
and organisations)
•Facilitation (e.g. engagement with the public).
Breakdown of borough carbon emissions by use type, 
showing the categorisation and proportion of emissions 
from each source, and the control the Council has over each 
sector.26 |  LBTH Net Zero Carbon  |  March 20  |  Rev ALBTH Net Zero Carbon Plan Timeline  |  A long and ambitious journey
2020 2050 2030 2040
2020: All new homes to 
be Passivhaus standard2025: All new 
buildings to be net 
zero carbon
2030: 25% of existing buildings to 
be heated by low carbon sources2040: 50% of existing buildings to 
be heated by low carbon sources2050: 100% of existing buildings to be 
heated by low carbon sources
2021: All new domestic and non-
domestic buildings  to incorporate 
PV
2025: 20,000m2on 
Council buildings 
(approx. 4.2MW)
2025: 70% recycling rate
2025: 20% reduction in food 
waste
2021: All new car 
parking spaces, 
including homes) to 
have electric car 
charging points
2025: All public car parks 
to have electric car 
charging points
2025: all Council cars/vans 
electric
2025: Average 
urban greening 
factor of 0.3
2035: Average 
urban greening 
factor of 0.4
2050: Average 
urban greening 
factor of 0.5Buildings Power Waste TransportForestry & 
Land-Use
2025: zero biodegradable 
waste to landfill (incl. food, 
paper, card, etc)2025
2050: Carbon content of grid 27 gCO2e 2030: Carbon content of grid 85 gCO2e 2020: Carbon content of grid 136 gCO2e2021: No gas boilers in 
new buildings2050: 80% of all existing homes have 
had a low energy retrofit and achieve an 
average heating energy demand of 
40kWh/m2/yr.
2030: All Council buildings 
are assumed to be off-gas 
by 2030
2050: 99% of 
cars and light 
vans are electric
2023: 100% of 
homes and 
businesses to be 
served with food 
waste collection
2050: 20% reduction in non-CO2
emissions from wastewater (through 
engagement with Thames Water).2035
2030: 100% of all Council 
homes have had a low energy 
retrofit and achieve an 
average heating energy 
demand of 40kWh/m2/yr.2035: All existing 
homes to be EPC C 
or better
2050: Gas 
boilers are 
phased out
2050: 430MW PVs in 
total across the whole of 
Tower Hamlets
2030: All refuse 
lorries are electric27 |  LBTH Net Zero Carbon  |  March 20  |  Rev ALBTH Net Zero Carbon Plan
Achieving Net Zero Carbon by 2050 
We have used the Etude tool for estimating future Borough emissions 
and to estimate what changes are required to move towards a net 
Zero Carbon borough. The tool shows that radical changes to all 
sectors are required. In the borough this includes Net Zero Carbon new 
buildings, existing building stock energy efficiency, switch from gas 
heating to low carbon heat and the electrification of transport. 
The cumulative emission reductions demonstrate that near zero carbon 
emissions are possible, and these can be feasibly offset by carbon 
reduction projects. However, it is likely that these projects will not be 
possible within the borough, and will have to be achieved elsewhere. 
Other local authorities are likely to have the same issue, and this is 
something that it makes sense to assume may be dealt with at a 
national level.
Key features of a zero carbon future
A summary of the assumptions used in the forecast is given. The key 
features of this scenario are:
•All new buildings, from now, are built to be highly energy efficient 
and use a heat pump as the primary heat source.
•Road transport rapidly converts to electric. Road journeys are 
reduced.
•Incentives and regulation result in a significant reduction in 
commercial, industry and aviation emissions.
The first two changes mean major investment in the electric 
infrastructure in the borough is necessary,
Acting quickly and achieving Net Zero Carbon earlier 
than 2050?
It is possible to achieve Net Zero Carbon earlier than 2050 but it is 
very challenging. We would recommend identifying credible solutions 
to achieve Net Zero Carbon by 2050 with a minimal amount of offset 
first and also accelerate any actions which can be accelerated, while 
taking the time required to deliver others.
Key assumptions used for zero carbon forecast. Latest reported emissions (2016) and forecast 2050 emissions based on a scenario where carbon 
emissions reduction is prioritised in policy, by businesses and by national government. The breakdown 
matches the categories used by the CCC. Emissions would need to reduce by 90%over the next 30 
years. Category Major assumptions for change used for net zero carbon forecast
Decarbonisation of 
electricityCarbon content of electricity falls rapidly in line with Government projections. 
Carbon content of electricity is 0.085 kgCO2e/kWh in 2030 and 0.030 kgCO2e/kWh in 
2050.
Residential building 
energy efficiencyAll new homes built after 2020 achieve Passivhaus or an equivalent standard. 
15kWh/m2/yrheating energy demand achieved on average.
90% of existing homes have a complete low energy retrofit by 2050 (by 2030 for 
Council homes). Homes achieve an average heating energy demand of 40kWh/m2/yr.
2% of existing buildings are demolished and replaced with new build by 2050. This is 
approximately 2,000 homes over the whole period.
Electrical efficiency of appliances continues to improve but is offset by increased use. A 
net 20% improvement is achieved between 2020 and 2050.
Non-residential 
building energy 
efficiencyCommercial gas consumption reduces by 90% through replacing gas heating with heat 
pumps or equivalent, and energy efficiency measures.
Electrical consumption increases by 10% net as a consequence, however the majority of 
the increase from electrification is offset by improved efficiency and use of commercial 
heat pumps. 
Full retrofit of Council buildings to achieve a heating demand of 40kWh/m2/yrand net 
zero carbon through the switch to low carbon heating (heat pump) and solar PV 
installation.
All Council owned non-domestic properties are refurbished on change of lease. Achieve 
50% carbon emission reductions.
Building heating Gas boilers are phased out by 2035. Residual 1% of buildings use gas. (All Council 
buildings are assumed to be off gas by 2030).
All building heating is provided by a heat pump, or an equivalent low carbon technology 
(for example hydrogen fuel cell, or waste industrial heat). No buildings are heated by on-
site combustion.
Electrification of 
transport10% reduction in in car use through switch to walking and cycling.
Department for Transport emissions forecast for London is used and modified to adopt the 
CCC further ambition. Equivalent to 99% of domestic and light goods mileage completed 
by electric vehicles or equivalent by 2050. (All Council vehicles are electric by 2030). 
Electric vehicles achieve an average efficiency of 30kWh/100miles.
HGV emissions reduce by 80% through reduced journeys, change in manufacturing 
patterns, switch to rail, and developing hydrogen or electric drivetrain technologies.
Reducing waste 62% reduction in emissions from waste in line with ‘further ambition’ recommendations by 
CCC1.
Industrial efficiency 80% reduction in industrial emissions through efficiency or changes in the sector. This is 
comparable to the ‘Further ambition’ recommendations by CCC1.
Aviation 88% reduction in emissions . Personal air travel is reduced, particularly long haul and 
regular flight, efficiency improves. This deviates from national aviation growth projections 
which show a 1% increase in emissions. Aviation emissions are calculated from LBTH’s 
population as a proportion of total UK emissions.
Forestry & land use Significant tree planting in the borough has a very small but important impact. LBTH would 
need further reductions in emissions from forestry in other local authorities, potentially 
through a future national trading scheme.
F-gases EU targets for F-gas reductions are kept as UK law and CCC further ambition scenario is 
met.
Historic and forecast emissions for LBTH from 2005 to 2050. Showing contribution of main sectors to 
overall reduction.
1. Net Zero: The UK’s contribution to stopping global warming (2019) Committee on Climate Change
05001,0001,5002,0002,5003,000
2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050Green house gas emissions (ktCO2e)Decarbonisation of electricity
Energy efficiency of buildings
Decarbonisation of heat in buildings
Electrify transport
Push industry and waste further, reduce flights and car use
Offset required
Target trajectory
Forecast emissions reduction
-400-20002004006008001000120014001600
Total borough GHG
emissions in 2016Total required borough
GHG emissions in 2050 for
net zero carbonTotal annual carbon emissions from LBTH (ktCO2e)Offset
F-gases*
Aviation*
Industry
Forestry and land use
Transport
Waste*
Other metered energy
Buildings and townsZero Carbon Pathway for the London Borough of Tower Hamlets28 |  LBTH Net Zero Carbon  |  March 20  |  Rev ALBTH Net Zero Carbon Plan Decarbonisation of domestic emissions : Tower Hamlets Homes
Target: achieving an 85% carbon reduction by 2030 for 
Tower Hamlets Homes
Tower Hamlets Homes (THH) dwellings represent the majority of 
emissions under the Council’s responsibility, and are therefore a crucial 
part of achieving significant carbon reductions. There are 
approximately 11,500 dwellings managed by Tower Hamlets Homes. 
The majority of them have an EPC energy rating of D (42%) and E 
(32%) – although EPC ratings are not a reliable indicator of actual 
energy use.
Standards for new homes
All new homes should be zero carbon (regulated and unregulated), 
following Passivhaus or equivalent standards, and supplied from a 
low-carbon heat source e.g. heat pump.
Retrofit of existing homes
The principles are similar to those recommended for non-domestic 
buildings i.e. a combination of low carbon heat, fabric and systems 
efficiency, and PVs. 
Because of residential demand profile a low-carbon heat supply is 
even more important than in non-domestic buildings, and will require 
liaising with utilities and a careful selection of systems and contract 
arrangements to ensure sufficient capacity and acceptable heat costs 
for residents. Direct electric heating is generally not recommended 
except in the most efficient dwellings with minimal thermal demand. 
Retrofit: building up quality and capacity 
Supply chain capacity and skills will be crucial to reduce emissions and 
avoid unintended consequences. The Council should use the lessons of 
existing schemes (e.g. ECO, RE:FIT) and review recent initiatives such as 
the Retrofit Academy and TrustMark, potentially with the view to 
develop its own system of trusted suppliers. We would recommend 
partnering with other London Boroughs engaged on a zero carbon 
pathway e.g. Haringey Council. 
This will also help the Council to develop expertise and a supply chain 
which will benefit later housing associations, landlords and residents. 
Engaging with residents
Deep retrofit offers significant opportunities for co-benefits, such as 
improved health and comfort for residents, which could help engage 
them with the Council’s Zero carbon efforts.Carbon emissions in 2018 (actual), 2025 (target) and 2030 (target) showing rapid decarbonisation of 
Schools, Leisure Centres and THH Homes, alongside Council’s direct control emissions. As transport 
emissions from larger vehicles will take longer to decarbonise, these have also been assumed to reduce 
post-2025.
Programming and scaling up: a total of 11,500 homes will need to be retrofitted. The 
programme should be phased in order to allow the gathering of lessons and the development 
of a trusted supply chain, while responding to the challenging timescale of deep retrofit by 
2030. Dora?Setting the overall programme
Phase 1: priority & pilot dwellings e.g. 250 units/yr
Phase 2: delivery lessons from Phase 1 e.g. 500 units/yr
Phase 3: performance lessons from Phase 1 and delivery lessons from Phase 2, 
feeding into increased programme e.g. 1000 units/yr
Phase 4: performance lessons from Phase 2 and delivery lessons from Phase 3, 
feeding into peak programme e.g. 2000 units/yr
Phase 5: ramping down, starting to allocate resources and expertise to domestic 
retrofit wider in the Borough e.g. 1000 units/yr
Phase 6: minimal number , allowing completion and evaluation before end 2030 
e.g. 500 units/yr
Retrofit & evaluation of 11,500 homes
Expertise and supply chain ready to benefit the wider Borough
Delivery lessonsPerformance 
lessons05101520253035404550
Total estimated Council GHG
emissions in 2018Total projected Council GHG
emissions in 2025Total projected Council GHG
emissions in 2030Annual carbon emissions (ktCO2e/yr)Transport
Responsibility - Leisure centres
Responsibility - Schools
Responsibility - THH
Street lighting and other small
external uses
Buildings & Landlord areas
Addressing the issue of energy data from homes
The Council should work with THH and seek ways to improve its understanding of energy 
consumption in homes, without giving rise to privacy concerns. For example, at the very 
minimum, a service could be put in place for residents to voluntarily give access to their 
energy consumption. This could be incentivised (e.g. vouchers for energy saving measures, 
access to energy saving advice), and potentially reported by postcode / block without 
identifying individual homes. 
2020
2020
2021
2023
2025
2028
203029 |  LBTH Net Zero Carbon  |  March 20  |  Rev ALBTH Net Zero Carbon Plan Case study  |  A typical existing block of flats
A representative building
The block of flats shown opposite is typical of residential 
accommodation in Tower Hamlets. A typical building is four storeys 
high, with a pitched roof. Floors are expected to be concrete, or 
suspended timber for smaller properties. Walls are typically masonry 
with a cavity. Buildings are generally heated with gas boilers or 
electric heating.
Retrofit required
Four core strategies must be pursued to achieve net zero carbon within 
this type of building:
1. Fabric retrofit , usually achieved through external wall and roof 
insulation, floor insulation, airtightness works, high performance 
windows and mechanical ventilation with heat recovery.
Estimated cost per flat: £11,000 - £19,500
2. Low carbon heating , the most suitable technology is likely to be 
either individual water source heat pumps in each apartment, 
with an ambient temperature ground water loop supplying them, 
or an air source heat pump. Where inefficient communal heat 
distribution systems exist, they should be replaced.
Estimated cost per flat: £1,500-£7,000
3. Energy efficient services, appliances and lighting have quickly 
become more energy efficient due to energy efficiency 
regulations. 
Estimated cost per flat: Generally low
4. Solar photovoltaics (PVs) , installed to best practices they can 
provide more than enough electricity to achieve net zero energy 
consumption for low and mid rise buildings with good levels of 
fabric efficiency that are heated by heat pumps. Financial 
benefits for tenants can be maximised by the landlord 
submetering tenants and connecting the PV system to the landlord 
supply, so it can be used by all tenants within the building.
Estimated cost per flat: £2,500 + submetering cost
Reduced energy bills
These changes would not only dramatically reduce carbon emissions 
but also significantly reduce energy bills.
Bar chart showing estimated energy costs for a dwelling in this apartment building now and in 
2040, assuming a best practice retrofit takes place.Housing blocks in Tower Hamlets already include significant PV installationsBaseline block of flats: Gas boilers or electric heating, little insulation, single or poor double 
glazing, poor airtightness and uncontrolled ventilation through gaps in the building fabric. Space 
heat demand of around 160kWh/m²/year.Retrofitted to achieve net zero carbon: Heat pumps, 150+mm of continuous insulation to 
floors, walls and roof, very good double or triple glazing, excellent levels of airtightness 
and mechanical ventilation with heat recovery. Full-size photovoltaic array fitted with high 
efficiency modules and microinverters. Space heat demand of around 40kWh/m²/year .  Net 
producer of clean energy.
-£100£0£100£200£300£400£500£600
Standing
ChargesLandlord
electricityTenant space
heatTenant hot
waterTenant
electricitySolar exportCost per Dwelling (£/yr)Baseline
Retrofit 204030 |  LBTH Net Zero Carbon  |  March 20  |  Rev ALBTH Net Zero Carbon Plan The domestic housing stock in Tower Hamlets
Parity Projects CROHM tool
As part of this study Parity Projects have been commissioned to carry 
out a stock assessment of the homes in Tower Hamlets using their 
CROHM Area tool. This analyses SAP, EPC and LBTH data to give a 
breakdown of housing stock and to help with costing and planning 
retrofit measures at scale.
Currently low data quality
The database is in its infancy, and it appears that only the available 
EPC information has been used to give information about the stock. 
This means the confidence in the data is currently low and some 
assumptions and cloning have been used to populate data for all the 
properties. 
However, the tool provides a central database that LBTH can now look 
to improve to give them clear oversight of the energy and carbon 
profile of their portfolio. The assumptions can be revised as surveys 
and other intelligence-gathering improve the accuracy of data, and 
tracked using CROHM’s in-built data quality management tool.
Improving the stock assessment
Improving the stock assessment requires providing more data on 
housing to Parity Projects for integrating with the tool. This could be 
from work carried out by LBTH, the GLA, or by private landlords 
based on incentives provided by LBTH. Examples include:
•Importing any data held by Tower Hamlets Homes for their 
properties.
•Requesting data from Registered Social Landlords in the borough.
•Carrying out home energy surveys for parts of the borough due to 
energy bill aggregation schemes, or fabric improvements through 
ECO for example.Current combined data confidence for all homes in the CROHM Area tool for Tower Hamlets. 1 is 
the lowest confidence in data, 10 is highest. Almost 2/3 or homes are at the lowest data quality 
level.To improve this requires the quality of surveys of existing homes typically carried out for 
EPCs to be improved, or for LBTH to pass any data they may hold on properties to Parity. Image 
© Parity Projects CROHM Area.Estimated breakdown of housing by heating type for Tower Hamlets from CROHM Area 
tool. This data should be used with caution due to the confidence in the data at this time, but 
demonstrates the capability of the tool. This graph shows that 19.2% of gas boilers are 
older than an EPC C rating and so could be due upgrading.
Estimated distribution of housing by EPC band for Tower Hamlets from CROHM Area tool. 
This data should be used with caution due to the confidence in the data at this time, but 
demonstrates the capability of the tool. 
Estimated distribution of housing by annual fuel bills for Tower Hamlets from CROHM Area 
tool. This data should be used with caution due to the confidence in the data at this time, but 
demonstrates the capability of the tool. 31 |  LBTH Net Zero Carbon  |  March 20  |  Rev ALBTH Net Zero Carbon Plan Focus on policy
The power of policy
Policy is critical to deliver Net Zero Carbon. The potential for policy to 
cause significant change within the borough cannot be understated . 
New policies should be bold and reflect the urgency of the changes 
that we need to see to avert catastrophic climate change. 
Net Zero carbon new buildings
LBTH would have to go further than the draft London Plan if Net Zero 
carbon new buildings are to be required by the Tower Hamlets Local 
Plan. These buildings must have ultra-low levels of total energy use 
and space heating demand, have low carbon heating system and 
maximised on-site renewable energy.
Viability assessments are undertaken on any new planning policies. It 
is important that the Council’s consultants who undertake these viability 
assessments use the latest and most up to date costs, and account for 
projected cost reductions associated with more energy efficient 
buildings and low or zero carbon technologies as economies of scale 
take effect. The cost of not taking action should also be considered
Existing buildings
Every major retrofit which does not significantly reduce a building’s 
carbon emissions should be seen as missed opportunity. Planning policy 
should prevent this. 
Low carbon heat
Phasing out all uses of gas between now and 2050 is critical if LBTH is 
to achieve Net Zero Carbon. This change must start as soon as possible 
and planning policy should prevent the installation of any new gas 
heating system: gas boilers and gas CHP. 
Electrification of transport
Planning policy should include a vision for electrical infrastructure and 
transport in the borough.
Waste
New developments must be designed to meet increasing collection and 
recycling requirements.
Nature and Biodiversity
The Greater London Authority’s urban greening factor could be used 
to ensure that individual sites contribute to the overall ‘greening’ of the 
borough.The Towel Hamlets Draft local plan
List of recommended changes to Policy
Power
Set a formal target for solar capacity in Tower Hamlets to at least 430 MW by 2050
Buildings
Introduce planning requirements for all future housing in line with Zero Carbon target
This should be consistent with the recommendations of the CCC report on the future of housing 
(i.e space heating demand < 15-20 kWh/m2.yr). Passivhaus or equivalent should be considered 
and an assessment against Net Zero Carbon should be required.
Introduce planning requirements for all new non-domestic buildings in line with Zero Carbon 
target. 
This should be consistent with BEIS energy mission to halve energy use in new buildings. 
Passivhaus or equivalent should be considered and an assessment against Net Zero Carbon 
should be required.
Use policy intervention to prevent the installation of any new fossil fuel heating system (e.g. 
gas boilers) from 2020
Use policy intervention to prevent the installation of any gas-fired CHP system from 2019
Transport
Include electrical charging infrastructure in strategic plan
Waste
Target a 70% recycling rate for waste from all buildings by 2025. 
The CCC has advised central government that to meet our targets of achieving zero carbon by 
2050, a recycling rate of 70% of all solid municipal waste must be achieved by 2025.
Target zero biodegradable waste to landfill by 2025
As recommended by the CCC to the UK Government in May 2019.
Introduce new planning requirements for domestic waste storage and collection
Introduce planning requirements for construction waste on new-build projects
Introduce a food waste collection scheme for businesses
Forestry, land use and agriculture
Set minimum standards for green spaces in new developments.
Increase tree planting
Others
Implement Planning policies restricting use of F-gases by discouraging air conditioning and 
prioritizing lower GWP refrigerants.Comment on Environmental Impact Assessment (EIAs)
All major developments that require an Environmental Impact Assessment must include an 
assessment of greenhouse gas emissions and the implications of climate change. The 
guidance from the Institute of Environmental Management and Assessment (IEMA) ‘ Assessing 
Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Evaluating Their Significance ’ (2017), states the following:
‘All GHG emissions will contribute to climate change and thus might be considered significant, 
irrespective of whether this is an increase or decrease in emissions .’
Mitigation measures should therefore go beyond normal practice, and will need to be 
secured within any given planning consent. Particular attention should be made to ensuring 
emission reduction measures are integrated and delivered through the construction and 
operation phases. 
•For construction impacts it is noted that there will be monitoring and measuring, but LBTH 
will require reductions. 
•For operational impacts, the EIA should set out how the scheme will be net zero carbon 
on-site in 2050 as required by the Climate Change Act 2008 (as amended).
All assessments of GHG emissions should be done quantitatively and any use of professional 
judgement to assess significance should be fully justified.  Reference in the ES should be 
made to whether the national, regional and local policy requirements in relation to energy 
and GHG are satisfied by the Proposed Development.  The latest UK Climate Projections 
(Currently UKCP18) should be used to inform any such assessment..32 |  LBTH Net Zero Carbon  |  March 20  |  Rev ALBTH Net Zero Carbon Plan Focus on procurement
The power of procurement
Perhaps the biggest opportunity Tower Hamlets has to influence 
greenhouse gas emissions and sustainability performance in the 
private sector is through the products it buys and the services it 
procures.
According to the Council’s Procurement Strategy 2016-2019, the 
Council spends £340 million a year, across 3,500 different suppliers. 
20% of these suppliers are locally based.
A focus on procurement therefore not only potentially supports a 
reduction in emissions from the Council’s activities, but also a reduction 
in emissions from the borough as a whole.
Co-benefits of sustainable procurement
It is the Council’s responsibility as a consumer and community leader to 
procure its goods and services responsibly, and work with suppliers to 
improve the sustainability of their operations and supply chains.
Sustainable procurement is a powerful driver for delivering improved 
economic, environmental and social outcomes.
In doing so, some of the co-benefits that can be achieved are:
•Create markets for new services and products
•Reduce waste and improve resource efficiency
•Enhance image and reputation in the community
Tower Hamlet’s Procurement Strategy 2016-2019
The existing Procurement Strategy (2016-2019) sets out the vision, 
strategic objectives and a working implantation and delivery plan.  A 
large part of the delivery plan is the implementation of the 
Stakeholder Engagement Plan.
Sustainability is given a brief mention in the document.  Life cycle, 
whole life costing and carbon emissions are not mentioned. 
As this plan comes to the end of its life and is being replaced, we 
recommend that sustainability, carbon emissions and whole life 
costing are discussed more in depth in the new procurement 
strategy.  Further recommendations are discussed on the right. Key spending facts for Tower Hamlets
Sustainability targets in procurement List of recommended criteria for procurement1. Strengthen sustainable procurement policies
Create specific policies that are targeted at embodied carbon, whole life 
costing, recyclability and repairability
2. Benchmark, monitor and improve*
Identify high sustainability impact suppliers. 
Set targets.
Carry out regular sustainability audits.
3. Supplier engagement
Engage with key suppliers to help them improve their sustainability 
performance. Suppliers will recognise they must continually improve their 
sustainability performance to keep the business. 
Include senior management involvement, map supply chains , run supply chain 
improvement programmes and offer incentives. 
4. Trial and innovation
Encourage trial and innovation in order to find ways of doing things 
differently.£340 million 
spent in 
2018-19
3,500 
suppliers
*Tools for supporting Sustainable Procurement
GHG Protocols - The GHG Protocol Corporate Value Chain helps companies 
identify GHG reduction opportunities, track performance and engage suppliers at 
a corporate level.  The GHG Protocol Product Standard helps a company meet the 
same objectives at a product level.
Government Buying Standards (GBS) – contain a set of mandatory and best 
practice criteria across a variety of key sustainability issues.
The Flexible Framework Tool - self-assessment package which allows 
organisations to measure, monitor and improve how they procure.
ISO 20400: Sustainable Procurement (2017) – An international standard for 
sustainable procurement, designed for all types and sizes of organisation.
20% of 
suppliers 
are localBuildings, works 
& repairs1
42
5
63Adult social 
care
Environmental 
services
Health  care
Facilities 
management
Professional 
servicesTop areas of spend, % of total
100% zero carbon energy purchased
Key suppliers demonstrate continual 
improvement in sustainability
All suppliers use low emission transport 
for LBTH business and report emissions 
to LBTH
Buildings that host services run by 
suppliers (e.g. adult social care 
centres) to have low carbon retrofits. 
Emissions reported to LBTH.Actions to support sustainable procurement
32%
7%9%
7%9%19%
Food procured by the Council is 
high welfare, local and sourced 
from environmentally responsible 
farms.  
Work with all suppliers to reduced 
packaging and improve its 
recyclability.
Create policies that materials must 
be assessed based on whole life 
carbon, be responsibly sourced 
(BES 6001, ISO 14001, FSC etc) Targets to work with suppliers towards33 |  LBTH Net Zero Carbon  |  March 20  |  Rev ALBTH Net Zero Carbon Plan
Stepping up actions & Next 
steps
•Organisational changes
•Key stakeholders 
•A Zero Carbon plan blueprint
Embed
Monitor Action
Feedback
LearnReviewLeadership
ValuesEmployee 
engagement
Act fast 
learn fast
Taskforce
Citizens’ 
assembly
34 |  LBTH Net Zero Carbon  |  March 20  |  Rev ALBTH Net Zero Carbon Plan
 Organisational change
A new regenerative culture
The goals of a Net Zero Council by 2025, and a Net Zero Carbon 
borough by 2050 are ambitious.  The achievement of any ambitious 
goal requires strong commitment. 
We believe there are three essential cornerstones to achieving the 
sustainability targets at Tower Hamlets.
Embed– Goals  and targets should be embedded within the 
organisation’s ethos and culture. Strong leadership buy-in and a high-
level of employee engagement are crucial. 
Action– Action towards the achievements of goals should be 
committed and sustained. 
Monitor – Monitoring of progress should be undertaken throughout. 
The figure opposite illustrates how each of these elements are 
required in order to achieve results that are meaningful, informed and 
impactful. 
Agility and flexibility
We are responding to a global challenge as yet unprecedented.  We 
are learning as local, national and global communities. The journey 
towards our goal of climate stability and the restoration of balance to 
the natural world is unchartered.  We can outline a path ahead but 
we will need to be flexible and adaptable in order to be able to 
change direction if it becomes apparent that is the best thing to do. 
Tower Hamlets will need to create organisational agility in order to be 
able to respond to the obstacles, challenges and failures encountered 
on the way to success. 
Sharing and learning
We are all in this together. Seeking to learn from others and sharing 
lessons learned in this process of change will be necessary and 
extremely useful.  
Setting up carbon reduction communities, bringing together other local 
authorities in London, nationally and internationally for inspiration and 
learning are all significant opportunities.Embed
Monitor ActionThe will is there and 
the intentions are 
right.  But little 
progress is made. Meaningful actions are 
taken, but the lack of 
feedback makes it 
difficult to assess 
effectiveness and 
impact. 
Actions and results may be off 
the mark, or may contribute to 
other issues elsewhere.
Embed
•Align Tower Hamlets mission and vision with climate and 
sustainability goals.
•How much status and importance is sustainability given within the 
Council? What proportion of the budget it allocated? How many 
people are actively working on it? Does this reflect the importance 
of the issue?
•Define clear, descriptive goals - What? How? Why?
•Help foster a shift in values of each employee through enhanced 
training on sustainability and environmental issues.  This will 
automatically lead to higher employee engagement. 
•Assign responsibility for goals.
•Align role descriptions with goals. 
Action
•Create a taskforce
•Assign budgets
•Identify steps towards goals and take early action.
•Implement early test-beds and trials.
•Be open to failure, learn quickly and try again.
•Organise a citizen’s assembly
Monitor
•Monitoring – data helps inform decisions, actions and design.  
Prioritise early data collection on energy use and CO2emissions of 
existing building stock and transport fleet.
•Encourage setting up feedback loop. Learn from own lessons. Embed : Action : Monitor
Each element is key to Tower Hamlet’s success in its climate change goals. 
Actions are targeted and aligned with Tower Hamlets goals and values, achieving emission reduction and 
other targets.  Actions are informed by a monitoring and feedback process, learning from past successes 
and failures.
Feedback
LearnReviewLeadership
ValuesEmployee 
engagement
Act fast 
learn fast
Taskforce
Citizens’ 
assembly
35 |  LBTH Net Zero Carbon  |  March 20  |  Rev ALBTH Net Zero Carbon Plan Engaging with key stakeholders
Engagement is key
Engaging with stakeholders will be crucial to build acceptance of the 
Zero Carbon plan, and therefore help deliver it effectively. Solutions 
and lessons learned can be shared with others and opportunities for 
joint initiatives identified, with significant cost and time efficiencies. 
Finally, key stakeholders should be encouraged to develop their own 
plan, towards a Net Zero Carbon borough. 
Mapping the stakeholders towards Net Zero Carbon 
A stakeholder mapping exercise should be carried out. The adjacent 
figure is just starting point of key parties, listed here due to their 
expected share in the borough’s total emissions, their potential 
influence, their existing commitments to tackle climate change, their 
public visibility, how much they will be affected by the plan, and their 
interest in co-benefits such as air quality and reducing fuel poverty.
In particular, the Council should start engaging on Net Zero Carbon 
with:
•The public
•Large energy users e.g. Housing associations; Queen Mary 
University; NHS; Canary Wharf
•Other London Boroughs targeting zero carbon 
Engagement should include, at the very least, the Council’s usual 
channels of consultation and communication. 
In addition, we recommend creating a citizens’ assembly as a way to 
examine solutions, build consensus and visibly demonstrate the 
Council’s commitment to engage the whole Borough on the zero carbon 
transformation. 
Internal stakeholder engagement – putting carbon at 
the core of Council decisions 
The net zero carbon objective cuts across all areas of the Council’s 
activities and objectives including air quality, asset management, 
highways, planning, green spaces etc. Sharing information and 
taking carbon impacts into account in all decisions, policies and 
activities is therefore essential. We recommend mapping areas of 
overlap and impacts, and a review of internal resources and decision-
making processes. 
The Council should engage with stakeholders such as Canary Wharf, who have significant 
resources, buildings and land assets, are responsible for high carbon emissions, have the capacity 
to reach and influence numerous other parties, and already have set themselves ambitious carbon 
targetsHeritage assets in the Borough (2016 map): Engaging early with the heritage community is really 
important to build their buy-in, benefit from their expertise and resources, minimise the 
detrimental effects and maximise the benefits of carbon reduction measures,
It is crucial to engage with the publicIllustration of key internal and external stakeholders: the net zero carbon target should be at the 
centre of policy and decision making across the Council’s department, as it cuts across all areas. 
The various Council departments will also provide useful links with external stakeholders Be open about the possible 
visual effects of low-carbon 
retrofit (e.g. air source heat 
pump, PV panels, external 
insulation, new / secondary 
glazing)
Develop context-specific 
solutions
Maximise co-benefits e.g. 
better maintenance; fabric 
repairs; future-proofing 
against the effects of climate 
change (e.g. strong winds and 
rains)
The benefits of minimising new 
embodied carbon expenditure 
by retaining and prolonging 
the useful life of our existing 
stock should be acknowledged
36 |  LBTH Net Zero Carbon  |  March 20  |  Rev ALBTH Net Zero Carbon Plan Zero carbon plan  |  A blueprint
Changing together
The world will only meet this challenge if everyone acts. For the Tower 
Hamlets to meet its part of the global ambition, local people and 
businesses need to establish what they can do themselves and take 
action, beginning immediately, to implement change.
The 4 key pillars of every strategy should be to quantify current 
emissions, to set headline objectives in line with regional and national 
objectives, to translate the targets into clear, deliverable actions and 
to consider how to influence others to act.
Developing a common language
The specific actions required will be widely varied depending on the 
nature of the business or organisation. However there are some 
common elements that everyone and every organisation should use as 
a framework in order for priorities to be clear and ultimately so that 
progress is measurable. Separating current emissions into the sectors 
set out by the Committee for Climate Change makes it easier to fit the 
specific plan for one organisation into the National action framework. 
Understanding precisely for each sector the difference between direct 
control emissions and influence is also very useful.
Quantifying greenhouse gas emissions
The first concern is to establish, with as much clarity and detail as 
possible, what the starting point is. Priorities for action, where the 
greatest improvement may be achieved most expeditiously, quickly 
become clear by having a thorough audit of the current emissions. 
Setting headline objectives and concrete actions
Breaking the overall objective (Net Zero) down, both in time as a set 
of milestones and within any organisation as a set of headline 
objectives and deliverable actions is a vital exercise if ambitions are 
to be turned into real progress. The strategy should also recognise that 
change will happen over time but that steady progress is necessary.
Influencing
Most organisations have influence over emissions that are outside their 
direct control, as Landlords to individuals or smaller  businesses, as 
exemplars to peer businesses and staff members and as networkers, 
interacting with partner organisations and especially with suppliers. A common language 1. Quantify emissions 2. Set headline objectives 3. Define concrete actions 4. Consider influence
Start with an assessment of the current 
baseline emissionsHeadline objectives should articulate the 
2050 destinationActions should be clearly defined and 
include a timescale or scheduleProcurement and engagement can 
greatly increase the effect of the plan
Power Example:
Establish current renewable energy 
generation capacityExample:
Set renewable energy generation capacity 
target for 2050Example:
Install Xm2of PVs on the roof of building 
A by the end of 2022Example:
Favour suppliers with a commitment to 
renewable energy
Buildings Examples:
Record current gas, electricity and other 
fuel usage
Categorise existing heating systems by 
fuel type, location and energy use
Analyse building stockExamples:
Set carbon reduction (on-site) for all 
buildings or a typical building
Set year for phasing out of gas heatingExample:
Switch gas boiler to heat pump in building 
B by 2024Example:
Liaise with landlord regarding energy 
efficiency of rented properties
Transport Example:
Prepare schedule of current fleet with 
fuel/mileage per year and expected 
replacement/lease termination datesExample:
No more petrol or diesel cars by 2030Example:
Accelerate the replacement cycle and 
replace 12 vans per year by electric 
vehicles from 2020Example:
Change private car allowance to incentive 
use of electric cars by staff
Waste Example:
Quantify current waste production by 
waste stream and recycling ratesExample:
No more food waste by 2025Example:
Start food waste collection in all offices in 
2020Example:
Explain to staff why food waste is being 
collected separately
Industry Example:
Estimate current emissions by fuel and by 
processExample:
Achieve a 80% reduction in industrial 
emissionsExample:
Review energy supply to process Z with a 
view of changing its energy source by 
2025 
Aviation Example:
Audit of current 'air miles' for staff (and 
goods if possible)Example:
X% reduction in air miles travelled by 
staff and goodsExample:
Invest in good quality video conferencing 
equipment for main meeting rooms in 
2022Example:
Favour airlines with a commitment to 
reduce their carbon emissions
Forestry & land use Example:
Audit current land uses by categoryExample:
Y number of trees to be plantedExample:
Run a staff tree planting initiative in 2023Example:
Liaise with Woodland Trust
F-gases Example:
Audit of current refrigeration equipment Example:
No refrigerant with a Global Warming 
Potential of more than X by 2025Example: 
Set design standards for new buildings 
and equipment.