GREEN STRATEGY 
A GREENER FUTURE FOR MIDDLESBROUGH
Making Middlesbrough a greener and healthier place to live and workIntroduction -Middlesbrough Mayor, Andy Preston:
Everything I do as Elected Mayor of Middlesbrough is about the future of 
our great town. I’m massively proud of Middlesbrough’s past, but right now 
I’m more interested in what happens next. The opportunities and standard 
of living we can provide for everyone in the town are what drive me. 
Nothing could be more crucial than the environment we live our lives in.
We absolutely can innovate and show others how it’s done when it comes to 
being eco -friendly and protecting the planet. The Council declared a climate 
emergency in 2019. 
We have ambitious targets to be carbon neutral by 2029 as an organisation. 
Our goal is for the whole town to be carbon neutral ten years later, well 
ahead of the government’s 2050 target. Middlesbrough will of course always 
be a red and white town.
But I’m determined we will be proud to be a green town too.
We owe it to the children and young people who will build happy lives here 
and write the next chapter of our history.
Thank you for taking the time to share your views as part of the 
consultation.
Andy PrestonMiddlesbrough –A Green Town
A greener future for Middlesbrough
The council is setting out an ambitious 10 year vision 
to develop a Green agenda to rise to the challenge of 
climate change and support and improve biodiversity 
within Middlesbrough.
It sets a programme to meet government targets for 
greenhouse gas emissions and make the town more 
climate resilient to make sure we are prepared and can 
adapt to changes in climate and to minimise the 
environmental impact of council services in future.
There are three broad aims to make Middlesbrough a 
more sustainable town and meet our obligations:
1To make Middlesbrough Council net carbon neutral
by 2029.
2To ensure Middlesbrough as a town is net carbon 
neutral by 2039.
3Middlesbrough to be alead authority on 
environmental issues .
Photo courtesy of Martin Allen
We will base the strategy on the ten One Planet Living principles :
health and happiness; equity and local economy; culture and communities; land and 
nature; sustainable water; local and sustainable food; travel and transport; materials 
and products; zero waste; zero carbon energy
Green energy
The council will develop an energy strategy that aspires to all 
council buildings energy supply being carbon net neutral by 2029.
One Planet Living principles -zero carbon
How we will do this:
Ascertain current carbon footprint 
Develop and publish an Energy Strategy 2021
Purchase energy from green or renewable fuel sources to be 
carbon neutral by 2030 . 
Effectively monitor and report on existing carbon footprint 
2020
Provide guidance to manage buildings more efficiently 2020
Explore  options for offsetting our carbon emissions 
Evaluate technology that will introduce energy efficiencies
Move towards greener transport 
One Planet Living principle -travel and transport
How we will do this :
•Phase in the purchase of green fleet vehicles by 2029
•Develop the installation of an infrastructure to provide electric charging points for public taxis 
and private vehicles across the town 
•Work with public transport providers to enable their move to sustainable fuel use
•Encourage the use and uptake of cycling and walking across Middlesbrough 
Sustainably manage and develop green spaces 
To increase and improve biodiversity within 
Middlesbrough by creating rich and diverse habitats . 
Promote usage of parks and open spaces.
One Planet Living principle -land use and nature; 
sustainable water 
How we will do this:
Work with partners, volunteers and Middlesbrough’s 
Greenspaces Forum to improve the quality and  
increase the amount of green space delivering 
associated health benefits.
Increase the tree cover of the town from the current 
level of 11.8% to aim to reach the national average of 
16% by 2025. (This is equivalent of adding 320 
football pitches of new planting in size.) We aim to 
Plant 15,000 more trees by 2021.
Plant trees adjacent to main road corridors to 
increase pollution absorption.
Providing greater levels of carbon capture through 
increased tree cover .
Increase the amount of land given over to wildflowers by 
creating new annual meadows and managing existing 
meadows and verges better.
Become a more bee -friendly town through better 
awareness  and habitat management to aid pollinating 
species. Seek to install bee hives in central 
Middlesbrough locations and parks.
Embrace green purchasing
All procurement decisions will, except where 
clearly not possible, support the One Planet Living
agenda ensuring that relevant social, economic 
and environmental issues are considered and 
where appropriate integrated within the 
procurement solution.
One Planet Living principle -sustainable  
materials
How we will do this:
Consider the carbon impact of any purchasing 
decisions, ensuring products can be 
recoverable or recyclable at the end of their life 
cycle wherever possible.
Influence the supply chain to improve the 
sustainability in the supply of goods and 
services .One Planet Living principle -local economy
How we will do this:
Ensuring products can be recoverable or recyclable at the end of 
their life cycle wherever possible
The council will support businesses and VCS organisations local 
to Middlesbrough through a range of initiatives including:
Making it simpler to do business with the council.
Reduce the bidding burden on suppliers.
Have regard to the impact on small/local firms of the way in 
which a procurement is structured.
Providing clear information about selling to the council on 
our website.
Providing information where it can about potential sub -
contract opportunities arising from major council 
procurements.
Sustainable waste management
Increase recycling levels of municipal waste across Middlesbrough. Alongside this ensure that our waste disposal 
strategy promotes high environmental standards .
Liam Khan demonstrating the principles of recycling will Cllr McCabe
One Planet Living principle -zero waste 
How we will do this:
Rollout public recycling bins in the town centre by 2020.
Increase recycling rates for domestic recycling from the  
current  level of 33%.
Promotion of waste reduction and recycling via social 
media and educational campaigns to raise awareness.
Ascertain the levels of waste produced by the council 
across all services to reduce waste and ensure more
waste is recycled.
Introduce fortnightly household  waste collection and for 
food waste.
Reduce and ultimately eliminate all single use plastics in all 
council facilities and activities including public events.
Community engagement 
Develop:
Community engagement activities and initiatives. 
Educational programmes to promote environmental 
sustainability town -wide .
One Planet Living principle -culture and community
How we will do this:
Work with community groups and volunteers to help 
make Middlesbrough a greener and better place to 
live
Work with schools and groups to promote greater 
environmental awareness and involvement .Middlesbrough Community Champions litter pick
Middlesbrough Food Policy’s aim is to work with the 
Middlesbrough Food Partnership to develop and 
maintain a sustainable and fair food system in 
Middlesbrough that promotes and offers healthy 
affordable food for all based on the following 
principles :
Support local businesses and settings to 
procure and provide healthy and sustainable 
food to boost local prosperity, encourage 
healthy eating and protect the environment .
Inspire and enable the local food culture so 
that all residents  have access to buy, grow, 
produce and cook affordable, healthy and 
sustainable food .
Help residents and businesses to minimise and 
recycle food and food related waste either 
individually or collectively to increase the 
sustainability of local food and reduce its 
impact on the environment .Sustainable food
One Planet Living Principle –sustainable food 
How we will do this:
Middlesbrough aims to become a Gold Sustainable Food 
Place by promoting exceptional achievement in two areas :
oFood poverty and food insecurity and food access
oSustainable food  policy environment.
Aim to establish a surplus food redistribution hub.
Middlesbrough will continue to be a Fair Trade Town 
which ensures producers in developing countries receive a 
fair price for their goods .
Health and the environment
Cleaner air and access to green space and sustainable travel and food have significant physical and mental wellbeing benefits. Long term 
exposure to man -made air pollution in the UK can worsen existing conditions such as asthmas and increase the risk of  stroke, cancer and 
respiratory diseases in the longer term. These health harms do not fall equally across the populations with the burden falling hardest in 
our most deprived communities. Making changes to improve environmental outcomes in the town has the potential both to improve
overall health outcomes whilst also addressing the inequalities in these outcomes for those who stand to benefit most .
One Planet Living principle -health and happiness
How we will do this :
 Implement a South Tees Clean Air Strategy to make our air as clean as possible including:
•continuing to monitor air quality proactively to ensure that potential hotspots of poor air quality are detected early and that 
measures are put in place to make improvements
•engaging with the public on air quality matters, provide information and awareness raising to empower them to change their 
behaviour and consider its impact on cleaner air
•engaging with businesses to raise awareness of how they impact on clean air and how they and their employee’s behaviour can 
maximise their contribution to cleaner air
•continuing to lobby for national measures to improve air quality and access to funding at a local level to develop and 
implement initiative and projects which will contribute to cleaner air
•continuing to work towards a smokefree South Tees
Support the design of healthy environments working with colleagues across the council on housing and town centre developments 
incorporating health impact and inequality impact assessments to ensure actions across the strategy focus proportionately on those 
groups with most to gain .
Maximise the potential of the Sport England Local Delivery Pilot to create best practice and bring about changes through increasing 
physical activity for environment benefit.
Create environmental opportunities for mental health and wellbeing through the expansion of green social prescribing 
opportunities.
Building on existing practice and local initiatives explore the development action zones around schools focusing on areas of 
environmental benefit e.g. car free.
Supporting work across the strategy to support employers to adopt environmental strategies including via the North East
Better Health at Work Award, giving specific consideration to active travel, waste management and energy
efficiency.
How we aim to deliver these sustainable 
objectives
Develop a town -wide Green Strategy Action Plan led by individual action plan groups based around the ten One Planet 
Living principles:
Each action plan group is led by a Head of Service and will produce their own action plan. Performance reporting and 
monitoring of actions and targets will be overseen by the Strategic Group who in turn will report directly to Leadership 
Management Team.Action Plan Groups 
Group 1 Group 2 Group 3 Group 4 Group 5 Group 6 Group 7 Group 8 Group 9
HOS 
Environmental
ServicesHOS
Public HealthHOS 
Economic
GrowthHOS 
PlanningHOS 
CultureHOS
ProcurementHOS  
Economic
GrowthHOS 
Property 
ServicesDirector MEC
Who we will work with to deliver our goals
As well a range of other partners, business and organisations across Middlesbrough
Climate change is happening now! 
We simply do not have a choice to do nothing!
