Scotland’s Changing Climate –  
Midlothian’s Climate Change StrategyMidlothian Council Climate Change Strategy - August 2020 
Contents 
Foreword 2 
Executive Summary 3 
1. Introduction and  Content 4 
2. Profile of  Midlothian 4 
3. Legislation 5 
4. Climate Change  6 
5. The Climate  Change 9Strategy 
Vision 9 
Objectives 9 
What Can  Midlothian Do 9 
Challenges 12 
Mitigation and  Adaptation Measures 13 
Action Plan  24 
Appendix 33 Midlothian Council Climate Change Strategy - August 2020 2 
Midlothian Council Climate Change Strategy - August 2020 
Foreword 
Foreword by Councillor Russell Imrie: 
“Mitigating the impacts  of climate change, reducing the burden on the planets 
natural resources and creating an environment where people can live free from 
the damage of pollution is not just the responsibility of governments, business 
and individuals but also local government. And for the benefit of our 
environment and our communities Midlothian Council shall take the lead in 
setting an example in how it operates and delivers its services in a way that 
they do not cost the earth. We will work in partnership with local communities 
through the Community Planning Partnership Board who have also committed 
to the ambition of being carbon neutral by 2030. We acknowledge that in 
response to declaring a climate emergency we have to work and think differently 
- the Council has started this process by adopting the Midlothian Route Map, 
in response to the current public health crisis, at its meeting of June 2020 with 
the ambition of delivering a ‘green’ economic recovery. Together we can make 
a difference” 
“Right now we are facing a man-made disaster of global scale. Our greatest threat in thousands of 
years, Climate change”, David Attenorough, Broadcaster and naturalist. 
“Our obligations  to  the next generation are the most important that we carry. A few weeks ago, I met 
some of the young climate change campaigners who’ve gone on strike from school to raise awareness 
of their cause. They want governments around the world to declare a climate emergency. They say 
that’s what the science tells us. And they are right. So today, as First Minister of Scotland, I am 
declaring that there is a climate emergency. And Scotland will live up to our responsibility to tackle 
it". Nicola Sturgeon, Scottish First Minister, SNP conference 28 April 2019 
“Scotland has declared  a global climate emergency and now Scotland must act as one to safeguard 
our planet for future generations”. Roseanna Cunningham, Climate Change Secretary 3 Midlothian Council Climate Change Strategy - August 2020 
Midlothian Council Climate Change Strategy - August 2020 
Executive Summary 
The Council declared a climate emergency in December 2019 and stated its ambition to achieve Net 
Zero Carbon status by 2030. A key component of the declaration is the establishment of a Citizen's 
Assembly to engage the community and business sectors and forge a partnership for change. The 
strategy acknowledges the Councils intent, reinforces the urgency for action and emphasises the 
necessity for change to mitigate and adapt to the impacts of climate change and global warming. 
The Covid-19  pandemic  necessitated an emergency response form the Council. It has brought about 
substantial organisational change across the Council in a very short period of time. The Council's 
"Route Map" out of Covid-19 identifies "Digital by Default" as one of its key priorities. It supports 
continuing the practice of working from home (introduced because of Pandemic) and promotes a 
carbon neutral approach to the workplace. New Emissions legislation (October 2019) commits the 
Scottish Government to achieving Net Zero Carbon status by 2045. This puts into context the scale 
of the challenge facing the Council and the transformational nature of the change required to achieve 
our 2030 target. 
The strategy sets  out a clear vision and set of objectives, to highlight what we can, and must do to 
combat climate change and highlights some of the challenges to achieving this. It focuses on a 
number of themes including Energy Efficiency; Recycling & Waste; Sustainable Development; 
Sustainable Travel; Business Processes; Carbon Management; Governance & Management; 
and Risk. The themes provide a framework for action but also contain a number of commitments -
some reflecting  existing  strategies and plans and others promoting best practice. They complement 
the targeted actions of the Action Plan and include a commitment to: 
establish a Climate Change Citizens' Assembly; 
raising awareness of climate change and promoting individual and collective action to combat 
it and make Midlothian "A Great, Green Place to Grow" 
using green energy to heat and light our estate buildings, making them as energy efficient as 
possible; 
increasing our recycling rates and reduce waste; 
expanding our electric and ultra low carbon vehicle fleet; 
adopting the Passivhuas building standard and incorporating "green" and "blue" infrastructure 
as standard design principles for new development; 
investiagte the feasibility of Zero Carbon Development Zones; 
delivering the Shawfair low carbon community heating system and investigating options to 
develop heat networks across the County; 
accelerating development of the Midlothian Active Travel network including cross-boundary 
connections for longer distance commuting and leisure routes; and 
accelerating organisational change to extend home working and reduce the need to travel to 
work. 
For the first  time the strategy is accompanied by an Action Plan. In addition to the commitments in 
the strategy , the Action Plan sets out a series of short term (2 - 3 years), cross service actions 
designed to kick-start change and build momentum towards our net zero goal by 2030. It is not an 
exhaustive list by any means but it is designed to be an iterative process and reviewed and updated 
annually. The newly constituted Climate Change Board will oversea this process, the preparation of 
a new Carbon Management Plan and the Public Bodies Climate Change Duties annual reports. 
The strategy and  Action Plan have been published together and should be read as one document. 
The strategy is an iterative process and will change over time. It sits alongside existing plans and 
strategies which in their own right contribute to combating climate change. Midlothian Council Climate Change Strategy - August 2020 4 
Midlothian Council Climate Change Strategy - August 2020 
1. Introduction and Content 
1.1 Governments and international  organisations and institutions accept the science of climate 
change and the impact climate change is having across the world. The Kyoto Protocol of 1997 and 
Paris Agreement of 2016 introduced a commitment by Nations to reduce greenhouse gas emissions 
and restrict the rise in global average temperatures to well within 2.0ºC (1.5ºC if possible) above 
pre-industrial levels. Subsequent legislation at EU and national level in the UK and Scotland (1) reinforce 
this commitment. 
1.2 The declaration  in  April 2019 by the Scottish Government of a “Climate Emergency”, based on 
the latest Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (2) report and the UK Committee on Climate 
Change (3) report (both 2019), brings into sharp focus the scale of the problem and the urgency for 
action. If there is no further action on climate change then we will reach the predicted 1.5ºC increase 
in global temperature by 2040. Climate change is an international crisis that affects everyone. The 
success or otherwise of global action depends on changes made locally, not just by government but 
by businesses, schools, communities and individual members of the public, which cumulatively can 
make that essential difference. Urgent and immediate action is necessary within the next ten years 
if momentum for change is to be achieved and maintained. 
1.3 In December  2019,  Midlothian Council agreed to declare a "Climate Emergency" that requires 
urgent action. The declaration seeks to make the Council's activities net-zero carbon by 2030 and 
makes a commitment to support and work with others to achieve this. This includes the establishment 
of a Citizens Assembly and Climate Change Partnership, amongst other commitments, to promote 
an inclusive approach to engage the wider Midlothian community, particularly young people. 
1.4 This strategy replaces  the one prepared by the Council in 2014. It seeks to build on progress 
to date and co-ordinate effort and focus on actions and outcomes that make a direct and immediate 
impact on reducing our carbon footprint in the next five years and in subsequent years to reaching 
the target of becoming net-zero carbon by 2030. While it concentrates primarily on the Council’s 
estate and operational activities it also seeks to lead by example and to encourage its employees 
and members of the public and business community to make a commitment to change and a 
commitment to stop contributing to climate change. 
1.5 The scale of  the challenge, the commitment required to change behaviours, practices and 
processes as well as the investment required to "stop contributing to climate change" cannot be 
underestimated and the necessary resources to make this happen also cannot be underestimated 
and must be prioritised if we are to be successful and ensure a bright future for generations to come. 
1.6 The Covid-19  pandemic  initiated an emergency response from the Council in terms of changes 
to its service delivery and working practices. As we emerge from the Covid-19 lockdown period one 
of the unintended consequences of the pandemic may be to accelerate the pace of organisational 
change necessary to achieve our target of Net Zero Carbon by 2030. 
2. Profile of Midlothian 
2.1 Midlothian is a  relatively small local authority covering an area of 355 square kilometres or 
35,500 Hectares and forms part of the Edinburgh City Region. The population is expected to rise 
from 92,460 (4) to 103,945 (5) by 2028 due to planned growth and it is currently the fastest growing 
1 European Climate Change Programme, Climate Change Act 2009, Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009 
2 The IPCC  was created by the World Meteorological Organisation to provide Governments at all levels 
with regular assessments of the scientific basis of climate change, its impacts and future risks, and options 
for adaptation and mitigation 
3 The UK  CCC is an independent, statutory body established under the Climate Change Act 2008 
4 National Records  of Scotland Mid-2019 Population Estimates 
5 National Records  of Scotland Population Projections for Scottish Areas (2018-Based) 5 Midlothian Council Climate Change Strategy - August 2020 
Midlothian Council Climate Change Strategy - August 2020 
local authority area in Scotland. Approximately 7% of the area is urban and 93% is rural comprising 
countryside, green belt, agriculture land, forestry and protected environmental designations. The 
principal population centres are mostly located across the northern half of the County (except Penicuik) 
and all are within a 30 minute drive time from Edinburgh. 
2.2 Midlothian borders Edinburgh  to the north, East Lothian to the east and the Scottish Borders 
to the south. The Pentland Hills forms its boundary to the west. Road and rail connections (A702, 
A701, A7, A68, A720 and Borders Rail) provide direct links with Edinburgh City to the north and 
Scottish Borders and north east England to the south. The A720 Edinburgh City Bypass forms much 
of the boundary between Midlothian and Edinburgh and provides east/west connections with East 
Lothian, west Edinburgh and beyond. The close proximity of Edinburgh results in a strong employment 
and cultural attraction to the City resulting in a high level of out commuting. 
3. Legislation 
3.1 Midlothian was an  early signatory to the Scottish Government's Climate Change declaration in 
2007. This was a voluntary agreement that committed the Council to working with the Scottish and 
UK Governments to help reduce greenhouse gas emissions, taking steps to adapt to the impact of 
climate change, and working with communities on the issue. 
3.2 On 31 October  2019 The Climate Change (Emissions Reduction Targets) (Scotland) Act 2019 
became law. It amends the legislative framework for climate change action in Scotland (6) by setting 
new mandatory targets to reduce Scotland's emissions of all greenhouse gases (7) to Net Zero by 
2045. It also sets interim targets of at least 56% reduction in 2020, 75% by 2030 and 90% by 2040(8) 
to support the transition to a sustainable low carbon economy. These new targets give Scotland 
some of the most stringent statutory targets in the world and if achieved, its contribution to climate 
change will end within a generation. 
3.3 The legislation  maintains  an obligation on public bodies to exercise their functions “in a way 
that it considers is most sustainable”, and in a way best calculated to contribute to delivering the 
emissions reduction targets and any statutory programme for adapting to a changing climate. 
Secondary legislation (9) requires local authorities and other major public bodies to report to Scottish 
Ministers each year (in November) on their estate and operational activities demonstrating compliance 
with their climate change duties. 
3.4 In light of  the climate emergency, the Single Midlothian Plan has adopted a new sustainable 
growth outcome to be an ‘earth friendly’ partnership, resource aware and committed to working 
to support Scotland’s net zero carbon ambition by 2045 ( 2030 in Midlothian). and prioritises 
the following climate change specific actions: 
establish a Climate Emergency group in the Midlothian Community Planning Partnership; 
investigate a Sustainable Growth Agreement (SGA) between Midlothian Council and SEPA; 
investigate identifying tree coverage on community planning partners land using appropriate 
software. 
3.5 Each of these  actions seek to mitigate and adapt to climate change. 
3.6 The principle of  sustainable development underpins the Midlothian Local Development Plan 
2017 (MLDP) which contains a number of policies and proposals designed to support and deliver a 
future land-use strategy for Midlothian. The accompanying MLDP Action Programme monitors the 
6 The Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009 
7 Carbon Dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide, Hydrofluorocarbons, Perfluorocarbons and Sulphur hexafluoride 
8 Targets are informed by the findings and advice of the UK Committee on Climate Change (CCC) and 
calculated from a  baseline year of 1990 
9 The Climate Change  (Duties of Public Bodies Reporting Requirements) (Scotland) Order 2015 Midlothian Council Climate Change Strategy - August 2020 6 
Midlothian Council Climate Change Strategy - August 2020 
progress and impact of implementing the plan. The MLDP was adopted in 2017 and should be 
reviewed before 2022 (although this will be subject to change following the adoption of the Planning 
(Scotland) Act 2019). The Single Midlothian Plan will be updated next year (2021). The new Planning 
(Scotland) Act 2019 seeks to align community planning and land use planning through the production 
of Local Place Plans. 
Midlothian Council has complied with its reporting obligations since 2008/09 and remains 
committed to that obligation in future years. The review of the MLDP and introduction of Local 
Place Plans will provide a good opportunity to put climate change at the heart of land-use 
planning and policy and to work in partnership with local communities to this end. 
4. Climate Change 
4.1 Climate change is  the outcome of greenhouse gases being released into the atmosphere, most 
notably from the burning of fossil fuels (such as coal, oil and gas) for energy generation, industry, 
transport and agriculture. The build-up of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere causes the Earth’s 
temperature to rise, leading to climatic changes including less predictable weather patterns. 
4.2 In Scotland  climate  change is likely to mean higher temperatures throughout the year, reduced 
rainfall in summer and increased winter rainfall, less snow and more unpredictable and extreme 
weather conditions, resulting in increased flooding, drought, wind damage and heatwaves. These 
effects are already becoming apparent, for example through increased incidence of flash flooding 
and changes in species distribution. As climate change impacts accelerate, risk of disruption to 
transport, energy and telecommunications services, as well as damage to buildings and other 
infrastructure, will also increase. 
4.3 This general trend  is currently effecting and will continue to impact on Midlothian residents. 
The latest Met Office climate projection data for Midlothian (2018) (10) estimates that under a mid-range 
carbon emissions scenario, summers will be 5% drier and winters 7% wetter compared to those in 
1990. Both summer and winter days will, on average be 1°C hotter. Under a high carbon emissions 
scenario, summers will be 5% drier and winters 10% wetter compared to those in 1990. Both winter 
and summer days will on average be 1.5°C hotter. 
4.4 Government data on  greenhouse gas emissions by sector indicates that in 2018, Transport 
(including international aviation and shipping) was the largest source of emissions followed by business, 
agriculture and the energy supply sectors. The Land Use, Land Use Change and Forestry was the 
only sector in which emissions reduced (see table 1). The public sector represents a small fraction 
of overall emissions. Carbon dioxide was the main greenhouse gas emitted or removed in most 
sectors but there were emissions of methane, Nitrous oxide and Fluorinated gases recorded (albeit 
to a much reduced level in most cases) across most sectors. Only the public sector and industrial 
processes sectors recorded zero levels of these non-carbon dioxide greenhouse gases. It is Scotland’s 
target to reduce all sector emissions to net zero by 2045. 
Table 1 Scotland's Greenhouse Gas Emissions by Gas and Scottish Government Sector 2018 (values 
in metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent (MtCO2e))e) 
Fluorinated 
Gases Nitrous Oxide Methane Carbon Dioxide % Share Total Sector 
1.2 3.2 6.3 30.9 100% 41.6 Total 
0.0 0.1 0.0 14.7 35.6 14.8 Transport 
10 The extent of future rise depends on the amount of greenhouse gasses the world emits. The low scenario 
is compatible with aims to limit global warming to below 2ºC. The high scenario will likely require significant 
further adaptation 7 Midlothian Council Climate Change Strategy - August 2020 
Midlothian Council Climate Change Strategy - August 2020 
Fluorinated 
Gases Nitrous Oxide Methane Carbon Dioxide % Share Total Sector 
1.1 0.1 0.0 7.2 20.2 8.4 Business 
0.0 2.2 4.2 1.0 18.0 7.5 Agriculture 
0.0 0.1 0.4 6.3 16.4 6.8 Energy Supply 
0.1 0.0 0.1 6.0 14.9 6.2 Residential 
0.0 0.1 1.6 0.0 4.1 1.7 Waste Management 
0.0 0.0 0.0 1.1 2.6 1.1 Public Sector 
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.5 1.2 0.5 Industrial Processes 
0.0 0.5 0.0 -6.0 -13.0 -5.4 Land Use, 
Land Use 
Change & 
Forestry 
Source -Scottish Greenhouse Gas Emissions 2018 -Estimates of greenhouse gas emissions 
in Scotland for the years 1990 to 2018, Scottish Government, an Official Statistics Publication 
for Scotland. 
4.5 Emissions data for  Midlothian indicates a similar trend to the national picture with transport 
being the largest source of CO2 emissions followed by Industry and Commercial and domestic sectors 
(see table 2). Between 2005 and 2014 there has been a degree of fluctuation in total emissions but 
between 2015 and 2018 there has been a year on year reduction. However, Midlothian is the fastest 
growing local authority area in Scotland and much of that growth has come about in the last few years 
and principally as a result of major planned house building (Midlothian Local Development Plan 2017 
(MLDP)) and inward migration. Over this period house completions have continued to rise and if this 
trend continues there is a chance that sectoral and/or total emissions may increase. The scale of 
housing and economic development identified in the MLDP up to 2027 will present a significant 
challenge in terms of reducing emissions given the consequential increase in population and associated 
energy, travel and consumption demands arising from this growth. 
Table 2 Carbon Dioxide Emissions for Midlothian 2005 - 2018(values in kilotonnes of carbon dioxide 
(ktCO2)) 
(ktCO2) Population 
(000's) Total 
(ktCO2) Land Use, Land Use 
Change & 
Forestry (LULUCF) Transport 
(ktCO
2) Domestic 
(ktCO2) Industry 
& 
Commercial 
(ktCO2)* Year 
6.6 80.1 529.8 14.8 147.9 203.6 163.5 2005 
2006 185.7 204.0 148.7 17.1 555.4 80.0 6.9 8 Midlothian Council Climate Change Strategy - August 2020 
Midlothian Council Climate Change Strategy - August 2020 
(ktCO2) Population 
(000's) Total 
(ktCO2) Land Use, Land Use 
Change & 
Forestry (LULUCF) Transport 
(ktCO
2) Domestic 
(ktCO2) Industry 
& 
Commercial 
(ktCO2)* Year 
6.5 80.4 522.9 3.5 151.4 201.8 166.2 2007 
6.4 81.5 525.1 1.8 147.0 204.2 172.1 2008 
5.9 81.9 486.1 5.1 143.6 183.4 154.1 2009 
6.3 82.4 519.9 10.9 141.8 198.0 169.2 2010 
5.5 83.5 455.5 5.2 139.2 173.4 137.7 2011 
5.8 84.2 486.3 -1.2 135.1 186.0 166.4 2012 
5.8 84.7 489.7 12.0 133.4 181.8 162.5 2013 
5.1 86.2 440.3 8.6 137.5 154.1 140.2 2014 
4.9 87.4 425.1 6.2 139.8 151.4 127.7 2015 
4.7 88.6 415.7 5.2 143.6 145.9 121.1 2016 
4.5 90.1 406.3 3.9 149.9 137.2 115.3 2017 
4.4 91.3 401.3 5.0 147.5 137.6 111.3 2018 
* includes emissions from agriculture. 
Source -Department for  Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (DBEIS), 2020 
4.6 The Council’s  2019 Public Sector Climate Change report also reflected a reduction in CO2 
emissions across its estate and operations highlighting that: 
the Council’s total emissions for 2018/19 were 16,290 tCO2 which represents a reduction of 
5,894 tCO2 or 11% reduction from the previous year; 
the breakdown of emissions sources included - Grid Electricity, Natural Gas and Gas Oil, water 
supply and treatment, Diesel and Petrol fuel; 
the Council consumed 17,815 kWh electricity generated from Gore Glen, Bilston and Roslin 
Primary Schools (9.149 kWh, 5.080 kWh and 3.586 kWh respectively); 
the Council identified fourteen carbon savings projects in the reporting year including three 
leisure centres, nine primary schools, one sheltered housing scheme and one resource centre; 
and 
the total carbon savings from energy efficiency projects identified in the report year was 407tCO2e 
-328tCO2e from electricity (12 energy efficiency projects) and 29tCO2e from Natural Gas sources 
(2 boiler replacement and energy efficiency projects) 9 Midlothian Council Climate  Change Strategy - August 2020 
Midlothian Council Climate Change Strategy - August 2020 
5. The Climate Change Strategy 
V
ision 
To become an earth friendly Council, resource aware and committed to working in partnership 
with others to achieve our net zero carbon ambition by 2030 and ensure that our actions today 
assist future generations to create a resilient and more sustainable future in Midlothian. 
Objectives 
Objectives 
To make the Council's activities net carbon zero by 2030; 
To establish a Citizens Assembly and Climate Change Partnership Group to engage the 
wider population, business, education and scientific sectors in the climate change debate; 
To raise awareness about the impacts and risks from a changing climate; 
To take a ‘One Council’ approach to reducing carbon emissions and putting this objective 
at the heart of our organisational activities, processes and decisions; 
To encourage people, businesses and communities to work alongside the Council and 
make their own climate change commitment; 
To lead by example and provide climate change leadership to our partners, communities 
and businesses. 
To develop our resilience and ability to adapt to the impacts and risks of a changing 
climate; and 
To monitor and publicly report our climate change progress 
What Can Midlothian Do 
5.1 The Climate Emergency  declared in December 2019 identified a number of commitments 
designed to achieve net-zero carbon status by 2030 which are reflected in the strategy and Action 
Plan. As a public body the Council owns and manages land and property and a fleet of service 
vehicles, it delivers a range of statutory and non-statutory services/functions, it is a housing provider, 
a regulator, a purchaser of goods and services, a policy maker and it publishes a range of plans, 
strategies and programmes. 
5.2 In the exercise  of its duties and functions the Council can: 
ensure all its  operational properties and facilities are as energy efficient as possible; 
ensure business operations and activities are conducted in a manner which stops contributing 
to climate change; 
choose to source its energy from green energy suppliers and take measures to reduce its overall 
energy consumption; 
reduce the amount of waste it produces and increase recycling rates; 
engender a spirit of collective responsibility amongst all staff to support the Council’s climate 
change objectives; 
raise awareness of climate change and the need to change individual behaviours; Midlothian Council Climate Change Strategy - August 2020 10 
Midlothian Council Climate Change Strategy - August 2020 
promote active travel; 
increase its electric vehicle fleet and increase investment in charging infrastructure; and 
promote the decarbonisation of domestic and commercial energy supply via community heating 
networks at Shawfair and elsewhere. 
5.3 Since publication of  the 2014 strategy, the Council has committed to a number of actions, 
developed policies and published plans, programmes and strategies and has participated in a number 
of projects, initiatives and campaigns all related to climate change and sustainable development. 
These actions are spread across Council services and include, but are not limited to: 
using building energy  efficiency measures; 
implementing a low energy street/traffic light replacement programme; 
developing an anaerobic digestion programme (food waste recycling); 
developing a recycling and energy recovery programme; 
establishing an electric vehicle fleet and charging infrastructure; 
publishing a Council Travel Plan and Active Travel Strategy; 
introducing a mileage allowance for work trips by bike; and 
awareness raising events/initiatives -walk/cycle to work weeks, “Earth Hour”/”Watts Going Down” 
campaigns, tax free bike purchase scheme and recycling promotions. 
5.4 This strategy seeks  to balance short-term actions with longer term/ongoing commitments to 
combat climate change and advocates a “One Council” cross service response to ensure the Council 
can make its activities net zero carbon by 2030. A number of existing plans and strategies have been 
published which, if successfully implemented will contribute to the objectives of the climate change 
strategy. Some of these policy documents are listed in the table below. 
Table 3 Existing Council Policy Documents 
Availability Contribution to Climate 
Change Strategy, Policy, Programme 
Accessible online. Acknowledges the need to 
respond robustly to the 
challenges of mitigating climate Capital Investment Strategy 
2020 – 2030 
change and adapting to its 
impacts - focus on sustainable 
development, travel and 
transport (MLDP 2017 - 2027, 
Midlothian Council Travel Plan 
2017 – 2021). 
Accessible online. Acknowledges the climate 
emergency and adopts a new 
sustainable growth outcome -Single Midlothian Plan 2020 -
2021 
to be an ‘earth friendly’ 
partnership, resource aware 
and committed to working to 
support Scotland’s net zero 
carbon ambition by 2045 ( 2030 
in Midlothian). 
Accessible online & at Council 
HQ and libraries. Promotes sustainable 
development, long- term 
development strategy for MLDP 2017 (+ Action 
Programme & range of 
Supplementary and 
planning guidance) Midlothian Council Climate Change Strategy - August 2020 11 
Midlothian Council Climate Change Strategy - August 2020 
Availability Contribution to Climate 
Change Strategy, Policy, Programme 
Midlothian, mitigates impact of 
development, phased 
implementation of development. 
Raises awareness amongst 
staff of need to reduce travel by 
car, promotes active travel and 
public transport, promote 
behavioural change to travel 
choices 
Promotes an Active Travel 
culture where walking and 
cycling become the normal 
choice for everyday journeys 
To promote sustainable travel 
and develop an infrastructure 
network to encourage and 
increase walking, cycling and 
use of public transport. 
Supports the protection and 
enhancement of existing habitat 
and creation of new habitat 
through development 
Promotes energy efficiency in 
all homes and ensure they meet 
the energy efficient standard for 
Social Housing. The standards 
seek to reduce energy 
consumption and carbon 
emissions in line with targets in 
the 2009 Act. New homes will 
incorporate micro renewable 
technology such as photovoltaic 
panels and be designed to 
incorporate electric 
car charging. Midlothian Council Travel Plan 
2017 - 2021 
Midlothian Active Travel 
Strategy 
Midlothian Transport  Strategy 
2007 (under review) 
Midlothian Local Biodiversity  
Action Plan 2019 
Strategic Housing Investment  
Plan (SHIP) 2019 - 2024 Accessible online &  at Council 
HQ and libraries. 
Accessible online. 
Accessible
 online. 
Accessible
 online. 
Accessible
 online. Accessible online. Supports mitigation and 
adaption measures and 
improves resilience to climate 
change Flood Risk Management Plan 
Accessible online. Current strategy under review. 
Promotes energy efficiency in 
all homes and reducing the 
number of households in 
fuel poverty. Local Housing Strategy 
2017-2022 12 Midlothian Council Climate Change Strategy - August 2020 
Midlothian Council Climate Change Strategy - August 2020 
Availability Contribution to Climate 
Change Strategy, Policy, Programme 
Accessible online. Sustainable Procurement Duty 
– consider impact of purchases 
on climate change, waste Procurement Strategy 2018 
- 2023 
production or scarce materials. 
Aim to improve air quality by 
reducing carbon, nitrogen and 
particle emissions, increasing 
energy efficiency, using 
sustainable energy sources and 
encouraging sustainable waste 
management and maximising 
recycling in the supply chain. 
Accessible online. Energy efficient design of 
schools (includes community 
facilities) Learning Estate Strategy 
Accessible online. Sets target to reduce energy 
consumption by 3% in current 
year. Property and Facilities 
Management Service 
Plan 2018/19 
Not publicly available (work in 
progress) To decarbonise local heat 
networks. To investigate 
feasibility and develop 
Community Heating Networks. Midlothian Local Heat and 
Energy Efficiency Strategy – 
Feasibility work in Progress 
Accessible online/at Council 
Offices & Libraries. Protects and promotes 
enhancement of green spaces 
including woodland Open Space Strategy 
Challenges 
5.5 As the Government  begins to relax the restrictions imposed as a result of the Covid-19 pandemic, 
the Council's route map out of lockdown signals an opportunity to accelerate the transition to a different 
way of working and providing services to communities. A key element of the emergency lockdown 
and of future business transformation centres around "Digital by Default", the ability to work remotely 
from the office at home or elsewhere and in doing so cut down the need for staff to travel to work (at 
peak times of the day) and reducing carbon emissions at the same time. 
5.6 Midlothian is the  fastest growing local authority area in Scotland. An ambitious programme of 
house building will present challenges to meeting CO2 reduction targets. It also presents an opportunity 
to affect change through the MLDP, planning application and building standards processes to improve 
the overall energy efficiency of new buildings, introduce micro renewable technologies into the design 
process, and drive down the energy requirements and consumption of buildings. 
5.7 Growing communities  also  introduces challenges in terms of managing change and mitigating 
environmental impact - influencing how places look, function, connect and adapt to the impacts of 
climate change. To this end there needs to be an holistic approach to the provision of infrastructure 
needed to support development including "green" and "blue" elements and a stronger focus on Active 
Travel measures. Above all, it is an opportunity to encourage a collective and individual commitment 
to embrace change and support the transition of Midlothian to a low carbon county. Midlothian Council Climate Change Strategy - August 2020 13 
Midlothian Council Climate Change Strategy - August 2020 
Mitigation and Adaptation Measures 
Energy Efficiency 
5.8
 In order to  meet the revised climate change targets proposed by the Climate Change (Scotland) 
Bill and be fit for the future, Scotland’s homes, commercial properties and the public sector estate 
will need to be net zero carbon (where feasible) by 2045. In its Climate Change Emergency declaration 
(December 2019) the Council committed to a much more ambitious target of making its activities 
net-carbon zero by 2030. Investment in energy efficiency to reduce energy demand and low carbon 
heat networks can make one of the most significant contributions to reducing our greenhouse gas 
emissions and addressing fuel poverty but this will also present a significant challenge. That is why 
the Government has made energy efficiency a national infrastructure priority. 
5.9 In 2018, the  Government launched Scotland’s Energy Efficiency Programme (SEEP), a 20-year 
programme to co-ordinate improvements to the energy efficiency of homes and buildings in the 
commercial, public and industrial sectors and to decarbonise their heat supply. To support the 
programme the Government has put in place a range of measures including a Low Carbon 
Infrastructure Transition Programme (LCITP) (11) which offers, amongst other things, financial support 
for low carbon projects covering a wide range of technologies, including low carbon and renewable 
heat. 
5.10 The Council supports  the Government’s approach to energy efficiency and decarbonisation 
of heat networks. It is committed to an ongoing programme of rationalising its property and depot 
estate (EWIM) (12) and implementing energy efficiency projects to reduce its carbon emissions and 
operating costs. It has been successful in securing public funding for several energy reduction and 
efficiency projects. The most recent was £1.4m from the Government’s energy efficiency programme 
(including part funding from Salix) (13) towards energy reduction measures in ten schools and two 
leisure centres. The energy reduction measures include the installation of LED lighting and controls, 
combined heat and power plants, solar and PV panels and pool upgrade. It is estimated the project 
will save £155,673 and 473 tonnes of CO2 each year. It has also been successful in securing funding 
from the same programme for improvements to Penicuik Town Hall and an energy efficiency project 
in Penicuik and a Midlothian wide Local Heat and Energy Efficiency Strategy Pilot (LHEES). The 
Council also has a rolling street light lamp replacement programme. To date it has replaced just over 
half of the existing lighting lamps (10,664 units) with low energy LED units and hopes to complete 
the programme over the next ten years. In terms of traffic lights the replacement rate is higher at 77% 
(of 105 sets). Emissions from older fluorescent lighting units are approximately five times that of LED 
units. 
5.11 The Council has  agreed a Sustainable Growth Agreement (SGA) for Shawfair (see paragraph 
5.24). The proposed district heating system at Shawfair is a key feature of the SGA. It is encouraging 
that the landowner promoting Shawfair and the current house builders involved in developing the 
new town (MacTaggart & Mickel, Cala, Miller, Bellway, Stewart Milne and Dandara Homes) are willing 
partners to the delivery of more energy efficient homes and sustainable heat networks (in line with 
MLDP policies NRG5 and NRG6). 
5.12 The Council has,  and will continue to promote initiatives to save energy as well as monitoring 
and managing energy savings. The EEP introduced energy efficiency standards for social housing, 
which the Council has incorporated into the design of new homes as part of its social housing 
11 To date the LCITP has offered over £40 million of funding to 16 low carbon demonstrator projects supporting 
low carbon energy generation and supported the co-development of over 30 proof of concept and 
development proposals 
12 EWIM –  Efficient Working in Midlothian 
13 Salix Finance  Ltd was established in 2004 as an independent, publicly funded company, dedicated to 
providing the public sector with interest free loans for energy efficiency projects that improve energy 
efficiency, reduce carbon emissions and lower energy bills Midlothian Council Climate Change Strategy - August 2020 14 
Midlothian Council Climate Change Strategy - August 2020 
programme. The Learning Estate Strategy sets out the investment programme for the improvement 
and replacement of the school estate. All new schools and refurbishment programmes include energy 
efficiency as a key design element and many schools have registered with the Eco Schools 
Programme (14) with 12 currently holding Green Flag status. The Council also seeks to maximise 
energy efficiency measures in all building projects. To this end switching to a renewable energy 
provider would result in further efficiencies and reductions in our carbon emissions. 
5.13 Reducing or stopping  the use of natural gas as an energy source (if/where possible) would 
reduce emissions further and by switching to electricity only from a renewable energy supplier would 
provide an opportunity to set a net-zero carbon emissions target for all Council buildings. 
5.14 The Scottish Government  has indicated that it is committed to phasing out the purchase of 
petrol and diesel vehicles by 2032. The Council has initiated a replacement programme of its grey 
vehicle fleet with alternative Ultra Low Emissions Vehicles (ULEVs) and has been using grant funding 
from the Scottish Government to lease or purchase electric vehicles and fund charging infrastructure 
since 2012. The Council currently has 21 electric vehicles and 15 public access charging points 
(including two rapid chargers) across Midlothian. The Council has also installed non-public access 
chargers at Bonnyrigg and Stobhill Depots and in Midlothian House car park. The Council is also 
investigating the expansion of the existing fleet and ways to increase usage, primarily as a pool 
resource. Earlier this year the Council agreed to extend its ULEV fleet and charging infrastructure. 
5.15 In conjunction  with  the energy related measures identified in the Action Plan the Council 
commits to: 
Switching to a  renewable energy supplier and reducing its use of natural gas as an energy 
source; 
Adopting the Passivhaus  design standard for all new housing and non residential buildings; 
A biennial  energy  audit of Council buildings and depots to assess its performance and inform 
future actions to reduce its carbon emissions 
Recycling and Waste Treatment 
5.16
 Landfill waste is  a source of methane gas emissions. Reducing the amount of waste produced, 
by recycling more of the waste produced and reducing the amount of waste that ends up in landfill 
will make a significant contribution to lowering those greenhouse gas emissions. 
5.17 The Council is  preparing a Waste Management Strategy and is committed to achieving the 
targets set out by the Scottish Government in Scotland’s Zero Waste Plan (15) and is signed up to 
the Household Recycling Charter (an initiative and commitment to promoting and improving household 
waste and recycling services). 
5.18 The Council currently  operates a kerb-side residual waste, recycling, food and garden waste 
(subject of additional charge) collection scheme. A joint Midlothian/City of Edinburgh Council Recycling 
and Energy Recovery Centre (RERC) at Millerhill was formally opened in September 2019. It will 
incinerate around 135,000 tonnes of household residual waste and a further 2,000 tonnes of 
commercial waste each year and will generate sufficient electricity to satisfy the energy demands of 
14 Eco Schools is an international programme of sustainable development education and action. It encourages 
young people to engage in their environment by allowing them the opportunity to actively protect it. The 
programme is linked to the curriculum. It starts in the classroom and expands to the whole school, eventually 
fostering change in the community at large 
15 By 2025  reduce total waste in Scotland by 15% against 2011 levels; reduce food waste by 33% against 
2013 levels; recycle 70% of remaining waste and send no more than 5% of remaining waste to landfill 15 Midlothian Council Climate Change Strategy - August 2020 
Midlothian Council Climate Change Strategy - August 2020 
up to 32,000 homes. In conjunction with its energy supply company partner, Vattenfall, the Council 
is currently developing proposals for a District Heating Scheme to deliver this de-carbonised energy 
to households at Shawfair. In addition to the RERC a separate facility on an adjacent site processes 
all the food waste collected by the partner Councils. By treating food and non- recyclable waste and 
creating renewable energy in the process it will help the Council contribute to the national recycling 
target of 70% by 2025 and the national landfill diversion target of 95% by 2025. The Council has 
extended food waste recycling into the Council’s main staff offices at Fairfield House and Midlothian 
House (2019). 
5.19 In conjunction with  the recycling related measures identified in the Action Plan the Council 
commits to: 
Publish a W aste Management Strategy and Monitor Progress 
Deliver on the  targets set out in Scotland’s Zero Waste Plan and its obligations under the 
Household Recycling Charter. 
Sustainable Development  
5.20
 Sustainable Development  balances  social, economic and environmental considerations with 
a view to meeting our needs today and into the future (within environmental limits). Legislation requires 
local authorities to contribute to the achievement of sustainable development and to demonstrate 
how they intend to do that. Given the climate change emergency announced by the Government 
there is a greater urgency for action and for transparency surrounding our progress in this matter. 
5.21 Planning -The  planning system has a key role to play in delivering sustainable development 
and making a significant contribution to reducing greenhouse gas emissions. The development plan 
provides a spatial strategy and policy framework to manage the development and change of use of 
land over a ten-year period whereas the development management process regulates development 
and change through the planning application and appeals process. Together both processes have 
the opportunity to enhance and protect the natural and built environments, mitigate the impact of 
planned development and adapt to climate change through delivery of appropriate infrastructure such 
as Sustainable Urban Drainage Systems (SUDS) and implementing robust flood prevention measures. 
5.22 The Planning  (Scotland)  Act 2019 became law in July 2019. It introduces a number of changes 
to the planning system in Scotland, principally in respect of the development plan process and makes 
the National Planning Framework (NPF) (prepared by Government), part of the statutory development 
plan and replaces Strategic Development Plans with a requirement to prepare Regional Spatial 
Strategies (RSS). 
5.23 As part of  the new development plan process, the Government has confirmed that the next 
NPF will include measures that will help to accelerate a reduction in greenhouse gas emissions. . In 
addition it has also signalled its intention to introduce "Green City Deals" to support its climate change 
agenda and align with existing City Region Deal Partnerships. The current Edinburgh and South East 
Scotland City Region Deal partners are collaborating with the relevant planning authorities in the area 
to input to the NPF process and prepare a draft Regional Spatial Strategy. This partnership establishes 
an ideal opportunity to bring together sectoral interests and prepare a land use framework which 
could, amongst other things, identify where resource can have the biggest climate impact. (16) 
16 The Government’s Programme for Scotland 2019/2020 identifies the creation of a Green Growth Accelerator 
or “Green City Deal” Midlothian Council Climate Change Strategy - August 2020 16 
Midlothian Council Climate Change Strategy - August 2020 
5.24 In preparing the Midlothian Local Development Plan (MLDP) and determining planning 
applications, the Council works in close partnership with Key Agencies, particularly those with 
environmental remits (17) to develop policy, assess the impact of planned development and identify 
infrastructure requirements that will deliver sustainable development. As part of the ongoing monitoring 
and review of the MLDP the Council has established a regular dialogue with Key Agencies to engage 
with and support the preparation of the new plan and to ensure it is Climate Change ready. 
5.25 Sustainable Growth –  The Council has agreed a Sustainable Growth Agreement (SGA) for 
Shawfair new town (estimated population of approximately 13,000 once built out, comparable with 
the size of Dalkeith). The SGA is a commitment between the Council, Shawfair LLP and the Scottish 
Environment Protection Agency (SEPA) to work collaboratively to deliver a world-class exemplar 
development within One Planet limits (18). Central to this vision is the design and development of low 
carbon buildings and the delivery of low carbon heat as standard to create a well-designed place for 
people to live and prosper and, connecting people to their environment in a positive way now and in 
the future. 
5.26 Design -New homes  and buildings are already built with high standards of energy efficiency 
but more action will be required if the target of all new buildings being zero carbon by 2045 is to be 
achieved. To this end, the Government will be consulting on new Building Standards (to be introduced 
in 2021) to reduce energy demand and associated carbon emissions in all new buildings and to 
require that from 2024 all new homes use renewable or low carbon heat. Since 2008 the Council has 
included a requirement in its development plan that new buildings and building conversions minimise 
carbon emissions as much as possible. The current MLDP continues this support for greater building 
energy efficiency and extends this requirement to meet the minimum carbon dioxide emissions 
reduction target of the then 2015 Building Regulations, and any subsequent revisions to these 
Regulations. The current plan will be subject of a review and will incorporate whatever measures 
arise from the Government’s proposed new Building Standards. 
5.27 Transport Infrastructure –  The relationship between land use and transport planning is key 
to delivering sustainable development. The transport sector produces the highest greenhouse gas 
emissions and it is increasing. The provision of transport infrastructure, which connects people with 
places and enables people to make sustainable transport choices and, in turn, more sustainable 
journeys, could make a significant contribution to lowering emissions. The MLDP supports development 
in locations where infrastructure capacity exists or which can be reasonably provided over the life of 
the plan. It also seeks to develop a sustainable transport network in tandem with planned development 
and identifies a range of transport related interventions designed to deliver this outcome. 
5.28 The Council’s  Active Travel Strategy 2019/2024 also includes a programme of development 
to extend and improve the network of walking and cycling routes across Midlothian. This includes 
making links and connections with and to the Borders Rail Stations at Shawfair, Eskbank, 
Newtongrange and Gorebridge. For many, the vagaries of the weather combined with the convenience 
of the car act as a disincentive to making that personal commitment switching to a more sustainable 
form of transport. A land use and transport hierarchy, which prioritises walking and cycling and public 
transport above car use, is essential if that mind set and personal travel choices are to change. The 
settlement pattern in Midlothian is quite compact and located across the northern boundary therefore, 
developing a network of clearly defined, visible and safe walking and cycling routes, which are well 
connected with and related to the places people want to go, is essential if we are to encourage a shift 
in travel choices and have any chance of significantly reducing transport emissions. 
17 including the Scottish Environmental Protection Agency (SEPA), Scottish Water (SW) and Scottish Natural 
Heritage (SNH) 
18 Managing, using  and sharing natural resources within the planet’s limits to ensure food, water and energy 
security for all Midlothian Council Climate Change Strategy - August 2020 17 
Midlothian Council Climate Change Strategy - August 2020 
5.29 Paragraph 5.3 of the strategy identifies the various actions the Council has taken in respect 
of climate change and sustainable development since the 2014 climate change strategy. Included 
in this list is the establishment of a low and ultra low emissions vehicle fleet and associated charging 
infrastructure. This currently comprises of 21 electric vehicles and 15 public access charging points 
including two rapid chargers. In August 2019 the Council agreed to use available grant funding to 
extend its vehicle fleet. 
5.30 Midlothian Green Network  -The Midlothian Green Network is the connected areas of green 
and blue features within, around and between towns and villages that provide useable open space, 
routes for walking, cycling and horse riding, habitats for wildlife and plants, and natural surface water 
and flood water management opportunities. The Green Network plays an important role in responding 
to climate change. Different components of the green network make different contributions, which 
can combine to have a significant local effect in terms of mitigation. The Midlothian Green Network 
is promoted and protected through the MLDP. Further development of the network, particularly in 
terms of habitat creation and connectivity will make an important contribution to the Council’s action 
on climate change. 
5.31 Trees, Woodland and  Forestry -Tree planting, woodland and forestry planting are an 
essential activity for tackling climate change. Trees help to mitigate the impact of climate change by 
absorbing substantial amounts of carbon. Many wood products also contribute to climate change 
mitigation by continuing to store captured carbon. Midlothian Council therefore supports commercial 
forestry in the right locations, in support of the Scottish Government’s commitment to increase forest 
and woodland cover to 21% of the total area of Scotland by 2032, including planting 3000-5000ha of 
new native woodland per year. Midlothian currently estimated to have around 13% canopy cover. 
Significantly increasing this is a key land use target of the Council’s Climate Change Strategy. (Also 
refer here to the relevant items in the action plan). 
5.32 Biodiversity -Conserving  and  expanding habitats, making them better connected and 
increasing their biodiversity have interlocking benefits in terms of climate change, in addition to helping 
to reduce net emissions by taking up CO2 from the atmosphere. Midlothian Council is committed to 
protecting and enhancing biodiversity, as shown in the MLDP and Midlothian Local Biodiversity Action 
Plan 2019. Improving habitat availability and connectivity is an important part of this, in part because 
it will support nature as it attempts to adapt to the changing climate. 
5.33 Sustainable Drainage  –  The provision, maintenance and development of green and blue 
infrastructure networks is central to achieving sustainable development and adapting to the impacts 
of climate change. As part of ongoing monitoring of the MLDP and, looking ahead to the next review 
of the MLDP, the Council has established a regular joint Key Agency liaison meeting with Scottish 
Water and the Scottish Environment Protection Agency (SEPA). SEPA has recently published revised 
guidance on flooding and enhanced SUDS standards in response to the climate change emergency. 
Scottish Water has established the Edinburgh and Lothians Drainage Partnership (19), which is seeking 
to demonstrate and promote the innovative application of SUDS in existing urban areas and in new 
developments to manage rainfall and storm water in a more sustainable way and provide greater 
resilience to the impacts of climate change. Scottish Water is also undertaking network capacity 
modelling to facilitate, amongst other things, a more proactive and predictive response to assessing 
future water supply and drainage requirements arising from planned development. The Council will 
work closely with SEPA and Scottish Water as part of the next review of the MLDP to ensure the 
policy framework and infrastructure requirements reflect the agencies revised guidance and standards. 
5.34 Sustainable Energy –  The drive to reduce our consumption of energy and for greater energy 
efficiency plays an important part in reducing carbon emissions. However, combined with the ability 
to decarbonise that energy supply can make one of the most significant contributions to reducing our 
greenhouse gas emissions and reaching a net zero position. To this end the Government is promoting 
19 A collaboration between, Scottish Water, SEPA, City of Edinburgh Council, Midlothian Council and East 
Lothian Council Midlothian Council Climate Change Strategy - August 2020 18 
Midlothian Council Climate Change Strategy - August 2020 
and supporting the development of Local Heat and Energy Supply Strategies (LHEES) and funding 
demonstration pilot projects across the public estate. The Council has secured government funding 
to undertake feasibility work into potential local heat networks in Midlothian and has commissioned 
consultants to prepare baseline data and provide guidance to inform the preparation of a LHEES for 
Midlothian. The Council is also developing Community Heating project at Shawfair using the Recycling 
and Energy Recovery Centre at Millerhill as the principal heat source. The Council has secured a 
joint venture partner, Vattenfall, to create an Energy Services Company (ESCO) and deliver the initial 
network connection to homes, businesses and schools planned for Shawfair new town. The ESCO 
will also consider the feasibility of extending the network to adjoining locations and heat sources at 
the Edinburgh Bio-Quarter and Queen Margaret University. 
5.35 In the transition  to a net zero carbon economy the Scottish Government propose to establish 
the Scottish National Investment Bank and extend the Growth Accelerator to become “Green City 
Deals”. Working across public and private sectors the initiatives will enable the necessary investment 
in emissions reducing infrastructure to secure Scotland’s net zero commitment. 
5.36 In conjunction  with  the measures identified in the Action Plan the Council commits to: 
Working with Key  Agencies and other partners to develop Climate Change resilient policies 
for the next MLDP. 
Extending and improving  the walking, cycling and Public Transport network across Midlothian; 
Developing the Midlothian  Green Network; 
Promoting the Shawfair  Sustainable Growth Agreement and working with its energy services 
company to deliver the Shawfair Community Heat Network. 
Expand the Council's  electric vehicle fleet and charging infrastructure; 
Extend and support  the development of a network of electric vehicle public charging points 
across Midlothian; 
Publishing Planning  Guidance  on Community Heating 
Sustainable Travel 
5.37
 Government data (20) indicates that the transport sector (including international aviation and 
shipping) remains the largest source, and an increasing source of greenhouse gas emissions. This 
puts the challenge of reducing emissions into perspective, particularly given that Midlothian is the 
fastest growing local authority in Scotland. 
5.38 Travel is an  essential part of modern life but if we are to support Scotland’s carbon reduction 
targets we need to reconsider the need to make journeys and our choices of how to travel. As 
previously mentioned (paragraph 5.14) the Scottish Government has indicated that it is committed 
to phasing out the purchase of petrol and diesel vehicles by 2032. 
5.39 The MLDP, the  Council’s Travel Plan and the Active Travel Plan all seek to promote sustainable 
travel by providing policy support, establishing objectives and identifying actions which: 
Reduce the need to travel; 
Reduce journeys by car; 
20 Source-Scottish Greenhouse Gas Emissions 2017 – Estimates of greenhouse gas emissions in Scotland 
for the years 1990 to 2017, Scottish Government, an Official Statistics Publication for Scotland 19 Midlothian Council Climate Change Strategy - August 2020 
Midlothian Council Climate Change Strategy - August 2020 
Promote walking, cycling and public transport as climate friendly alternatives; 
Improve walking, cycling and public transport infrastructure; 
Develop cycle/footpaths as part of the wider Midlothian Green Network; 
Develop links and connections with Borders Rail stations and other places of interest; and 
Identify developer contributions towards sustainable transport infrastructure. 
5.40 The Council’s  sustainable staff travel initiative encourages staff to change their commute to 
work by car to bicycle. Under the initiative, staff get the loan of a bicycle for up to two months to 
commute to work after which the bike will go to another member of staff. The Council hopes that the 
initiative will encourage staff to buy their own bike and change their travel behaviour after the loan 
period. Route planning and support is also available as part of the initiative. In terms of travel choices 
at work, the Council has introduced a bike based business mileage allowance, pool bikes and supports 
and regularly promotes a bike purchase scheme (21) at roadshows hosted by Cycle Solutions. 
5.41 The Council acknowledges  that in order to achieve sustained modal shift in travel choices this 
has to be matched by a commitment to: 
upgrade and develop the walking, cycling and public transport infrastructure and develop a 
network that is accessible for everyday journeys; 
make logical connections between rail and bus stations/stops and cycle paths/footpaths; and 
prioritise active travel and public transport modes over the car to make them more attractive. 
5.42 While the majority  of public transport journeys to and from Midlothian are by bus, the 
re-introduction of Borders Rail has expanded the Midlothian transport network to include the train as 
another sustainable travel choice for commuters and visitors to the area. The four stations at Shawfair, 
Eskbank, Newtongrange and Gorebridge are all well located to serve existing communities as well 
as planned development, particularly at Shawfair where the station is at the heart of the proposed 
new town. The proposed urbanisation of the A7 (MLDP policy Tran2) will introduce traffic calming, 
active travel and bus based public transport improvements on a 2.25 km stretch of the A7 from the 
Dobbies Roundabout (A7/A772/B6392) to Dalhousie roundabout (A7/B6392). Likewise the proposed 
A701 relief road and A702 link road will relieve traffic congestion on the A701 and provide an 
opportunity to deliver active travel and bus based public transport improvements between A701/A720 
Straiton Junction and Gowkley Moss Roundabout/Midlothian Science Zone. In addition the Government 
is currently developing proposals to redevelop Sheriffhall roundabout to provide grade separated 
dedicated walking and cycling routes across this busy junction on the City Bypass. 
5.43 These transport  interventions  are associated with major planned housing and economic 
developments and provide the opportunity to make sustainable connections with and between town 
centres and edge of centre services, out of town destinations and visitor attractions. The Council will 
continue to work with SEStran and other partners to secure funding to promote and deliver active 
travel and public transport enhancements across the local road, cycle path and footpath networks in 
Midlothian. 
5.44 To reduce emissions  levels and improve air quality the Scottish Government’s programme 
for government (2019/2020) includes a commitment to introduce Low Emissions Zones (LEZ) in all 
of Scotland’s cities, setting environmental limits on certain road spaces and restricting access to only 
the cleanest vehicles. The Government has also set aside a support fund to assist commercial and 
private vehicle owners who face the greatest difficulties in preparing for LEZs. The Council received 
support funding from the Government to carry out a feasibility study into the operation and potential 
extension of the Park and Ride network and facilities to mitigate any adverse impact the LEZ may 
have on Midlothian businesses. 
5.45 In conjunction  with  the measures identified in the Action Plan the Council commits to: 
21 A salary sacrifice bike purchase scheme - cyclesolutions.info/midlothian Midlothian Council Climate Change Strategy - August 2020 20 
Midlothian Council Climate Change Strategy - August 2020 
Delivering the MLDP commitment to provide Active Travel and Public Transport improvements 
along the A7 and A701; 
Investigating feasibility of establishing a system of discounted transport season tickets for 
staff; 
Working with SESTRAN  and neighbouring Councils to connect and develop cross boundary 
walking/cycling routes; 
Working with SESTRAN  and other partners to secure funding for or participate in sustainable 
travel projects and pilot schemes (i.e. SESTRAN e-bikes pilot); 
Review workplace  car  parking policy; and 
Establishing links between  the Travel Plan Working Group and the Council’s Climate Change 
Board. 
Business Processes  
5.46
 The climate change  emergency declarations announced by Government, the Council and 
other local authorities and public bodies and organisations all express the urgency for climate change 
action. The strategy seeks to reinforce this message but acknowledges that it will take effort and 
commitment on everyone’s part to achieve and sustain momentum. The strategy acknowledges that 
the Covid-19 pandemic has accelerated elements of organisational change which will contribute to 
that momentum for change. 
5.47 Raising awareness  about  climate change amongst staff and members of the public and what 
the Council is doing to combat and adapt to the impact of climate change is an important part of the 
strategy. The establishment of the Citizens Assembly and Climate Change Partnership Group will 
play an important role in this respect. It is proposed to resurrect the role of service champions for 
climate change so that every part of the Council has a nominated climate change contact. The service 
champions will promote the Strategy and Action Plan, encourage staff to contribute ideas as to how 
we can reduce our emissions and carbon footprint, and support the work of the Climate Change 
Board. 
5.48 Online access to  information about climate change and sustainable development via the 
Council’s web site, staff intranet, Facebook and Twitter accounts is also an efficient way to reach out 
to staff and customers alike. The Council’s Intranet provides a dedicated back-office resource for 
staff. The web and social media presents the opportunity for the Council to convey its climate change 
message and encourage individuals and communities to make their own commitments and take 
action against climate change. Behavioural change amongst staff is also critical to making a difference 
and is at the heart of the strategy. 
5.49 The Council and  its committees regularly consider reports on a wide range of issues and 
topics and include recommendations for action. All reports contain a section on report implications. 
In order to place climate change at the centre of the Council’s decision-making process it is proposed 
to subsume the existing sustainable development implications into a new section -"Supporting Climate 
Change". All reports would therefore need to give sufficient consideration to the impact of proposals 
on climate change and have to demonstrate how the recommendation(s) would contribute to the 
mitigation and/or adaption to the impacts of climate change and global warming, including sustainable 
development. It would also provide a degree of transparency and accountability into our actions on 
climate change. 21 Midlothian Council Climate Change Strategy - August 2020 
Midlothian Council Climate Change Strategy - August 2020 
5.50 The way we conduct business can also make a difference to our emissions. The Efficient 
Working In Midlothian (EWIM) programme deployed digital technology to enable some staff to be 
work from home. The Covid-19 pandemic has accelerated this digital transition to many more 
employees and the Council's road map out of Covid-19 lockdown has "Digital by Default" embedded 
as one of its nine core principles for developing new working practices. The ability to support a large 
proportion of staff to work from home greatly reduces the need for staff to travel to work and meetings 
which in turn reduces emissions. The introduction of the "virtual office" allied with electronic back 
office management systems provides an opportunity to reduce the amount of paper consumed and 
energy consumed by printing and photocopying. It will play an increasingly important role in helping 
to achieve our Net Zero objectives. 
5.51 The strategy also  seeks to support and assist with knowledge and understanding about climate 
change amongst its staff. Providing information and practical tips or suggestions about what individuals 
can do to help tackle climate change is important and will help to reinforce the collective responsibility 
we all have to take action to make a difference. To this end, it is proposed to develop a “Learn-Pro” 
learning module(s) surrounding issues and actions related to climate change. 
5.52 In conjunction  with  the measures identified in the Action Plan the Council commits to: 
Adopt Digital by  Default as the key driver for organisational change and transition to Net Zero 
Carbon working practices. 
Review and update  web site, staff Intranet and social media accounts to ensure the currency 
of Climate Change content and validity of external web links. 
Agree the composition,  remits and meeting schedules of the new Climate Change Board and 
Working Group. 
Developing a climate  change “Learn-Pro” learning module for all Council staff. 
Asking staff to  make a personal climate change commitment. 
Asking the Council’ s customers to make a personal climate change commitment. 
Carbon Management  Planning 
5.53
 Carbon dioxide is  one of the most damaging greenhouse gases contributing to climate change 
and global warming. Therefore it is understandable that much of the debate and activity on climate 
change is focused on reducing our carbon emissions. 
5.54 As a signatory  to Scotland’s Climate Change Declaration, the Council has a commitment to 
prepare a Climate Change Action Plan setting out targets and timescales to achieve a significant 
reduction in Carbon emissions. The Council has prepared two Carbon Management Plans (CMPs) 
since signing the declaration, one in 2008 and the other in 2013/2014. The second CMP expired in 
2016 and since then the carbon reduction target has been included in the Property and Facilities 
Management Service Plan set at 3% of the previous years’ level. The lack of an up to date CMP and 
reporting framework was identified as a priority action in the 2018 audit report in order to uphold the 
Council’s commitment under the Climate Change Declaration and to ensure ongoing compliance with 
our statutory reporting duties. 
5.55 In conjunction  with  the measures identified in the Action Plan the Council commits to: Midlothian Council Climate Change Strategy - August 2020 22 
Midlothian Council Climate Change Strategy - August 2020 
Prepare a new Carbon Management Plan which will be reviewed by the Climate Change Board 
at regular intervals and align with the timeframe of the new strategy 
Action Plan 
5.56
 The attached  Action  Plan sets out a number of cross service actions, which support the key 
commitments identified in the strategy and are either ongoing activities or new actions which contribute 
to reducing our greenhouse gas emissions. The Action Plan will be updated annually and reported 
to the Corporate Management Team (CMT) and will help to inform and support the Council’s climate 
change reporting duties. 
Monitoring
 and Review  
5.57
 In the context  of the current “Climate Change Emergency”, it is important that the strategy 
can deliver actions quickly. Regular monitoring and reporting is necessary if we are to achieve change. 
Annual progress reports will be submitted to the CMT for information and will supplement the statutory 
annual reporting duties. A full review of the strategy will take place every two years (or sooner if 
circumstances require). 
Governance, Management  and Resources 
5.58
 Good governance and management  are key to effective cross service working and achieving 
the climate change objectives set out in this strategy. Currently, the Council's Cabinet provides political 
leadership and has overall responsibility for climate change activity. The CMT is responsible for the 
Climate Change Strategy, action planning and performance monitoring. To date, Planning and 
Property & Facilities Management have been the lead services in terms of the climate change strategy 
and Carbon Management Planning respectively. 
5.59 It is proposed  to establish a new Climate Change Board to oversee and co-ordinate day to 
day activity on climate change matters (including, amongst other things, the preparation and review 
of the strategy and carbon management plan, implementing the action plan and ensuring compliance 
with the statutory annual Public Bodies reporting duties set out in the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 
2009) and reporting to CMT, Cabinet, and/or Council when required. The board would be supported 
by a cross service Climate Change Working Group (which will comprise the climate change champions 
from across the Council). 
5.60 In order to  meet our commitment to achieving net-zero carbon status by 2030 and to 
successfully implement this strategy, the Council acknowledges the importance of allocating sufficient 
resources to this end. Not all the actions in the strategy or action plan will require or incur additional 
capital or revenue spend but this will be a significant issue going forward. Some of the actions and 
commitments are ongoing work streams that can, and will be consumed within the current budgets, 
particularly those actions which relate to procedural and behavioural change. However it will be 
necessary to commit a dedicated staff resource to ensure that climate change activity is coordinated 
across the Council and that momentum is reached and maintained to the 2030 target date. 
5.61 In its Climate  Change Emergency the Council acknowledges the importance of establishing 
partnerships and proactively working with partners to shape thinking, generate ideas and to spread 
the cost. The recent announcement that the Council had secured an energy services company 
partner (Vattenfall) to deliver the proposed District Heating scheme at Shawfair (and investigate the 
feasibility of other community heating schemes and heat networks) is an example of this partnership Midlothian Council Climate Change Strategy - August 2020 23 
Midlothian Council Climate Change Strategy - August 2020 
approach and one which could signal a significant step towards our net-zero carbon target. 
Collaboration of this nature and others will be crucial to the success of this current and future 
strategies. 
5.62 In conjunction  with  the measures identified in the Action Plan the Council commits to: 
Establishing new operational  governance arrangements at Management and Officer level 
including a: 
Climate Change Board;  and 
Climate Change W orking Group 
5.63 Climate Change Risk Assessment 
5.64
 Assessing the risk  from current and predicted impacts of climate change is crucial to 
understanding how we can best respond to a changing climate, a changing environment, and how 
we may need to shape our services in future. As a Council there is an obvious need to include 
consideration, in everything we do, of how our current policies, practices and business decisions 
contribute to climate change or not. 
5.65 A number of  approaches have been developed to assist organisations develop appropriate 
risk assessments. In 2011 the Council prepared a Local Climate Impact Profile (LCLIP) based on an 
approach developed by Oxford University as part of the UK Climate Impacts Programme (UKCIP). 
More recently the Adaptation Scotland Programme (a programme funded by the Scottish Government 
and delivered by the sustainability charity Sniffer) (22) developed the Climate Change Assessment 
Tool (CCAT) specifically to assist public sector organisations comply with their climate change reporting 
duties and contribute to the carbon emissions reduction targets. 
5.66 In 2018 a  Council audit report recommended that the Council undertake a Climate Change 
Risk Assessment and to consider using the Climate Change Assessment Tool. The guidance identifies 
five steps to managing climate risks – 
1. Define the Challenge  
2. Assess climate threats  & Opportunities 
3. Assess climate risks  & identify Actions 
4. Report & Implement  
5. Monitor & Review  
5.67 Sufficient resource  will  have to be allocated to conducting a risk assessment using the CCAT 
but in doing so it would better align with the reporting framework and introduce more consistency into 
the process 
22 Sniffer is an independent charity dedicated to commissioning scientific research on the protection and 
enhancement of the natural environment 24 Midlothian Council Climate Change Strategy - August 2020 
Midlothian Council Climate Change Strategy - August 2020 Commit a dedicated staff 
resource to promote and 
coordinate climate change 
activities across the Council. 
Identify Climate Change 
Champions for each service 
to promote action across the 
Council.
Establish a Midlothian
Citizen's
 Assembly. 
Set a clear  expectation that 
travel for work shall be done 
using public transport, the 
use of the Council’s electric 
cars or by active travel 
(within 2 miles of the office). Corporate Management 
Team 
Community Planning 
Partnership.
Alasdair Mathers ,  
Communities and 
Performance Manager 
Corporate Management  
T
eam 2020
2020
2021 To prioritise the climate 
change agenda across the 
Council.
To assist the Council identify 
measures to help it achieve 
its Net Zero Carbon target 
by 2030. 
Reduction in the  Council’s 
carbon footprint Action Plan 
Table 4 
Outcome Timetable Manager/Service Action 
Responsible 
1
2
3 Midlothian Council Climate Change Strategy - August 2020 25 
Midlothian Council Climate Change Strategy - August 2020 Action 
4 Incorporate a climate change 
statement and policies  in the 
Midlothian Local 
Development
 Plan 2  
(MLDP2).
Set the ambition  that new
development sites shall be 
carbon neutral. 
5 Through the  MLDP2 
process i) promote  the 
concept of developing  an
‘urban forest’ in  Midlothian, 
ii) securing  21%  tree canopy 
cover in new development
sites, iii) set a presumption
against the loss of mature 
trees; iv) replacement tree 
planting for all unavoidable 
tree loss; and v)securing 
biodiversity net gain on all 
development sites. Manager/Service 
Responsible
Peter Arnsdorf Planning 
Manager
Peter Arnsdorf  Planning  
Manager Timetable 
2022
2024
2024 Outcome
Identify the Council’s climate 
change ambitions in its 
Evidence Report, which is 
the vehicle for public 
engagement.
Include climate change  
policies in the MLDP2 
Proposed Plan. 
Climate change mitigation  
and adaptation – promotion
and protection of mature 
trees to enhance carbon, 
sequestration, reduce flood 
risks, enhance mental 
health, provide localised 
temperature regulation and 
enhance biodiversity. 
To promote a site/area to
support and promote low
and zero carbon energy
sector developments 2021 Peter Arnsdorf
Planning Manager Through MLDP2 process
investigate the feasibility of
developing a Zero Carbon
Development Zone 6 
Sustainable development.
Implementation of the
Council’s Green Networks Ongoing Peter Arnsdorf Planning
Manager Promote climate change
adaptation through the
planning application process 7 26 Midlothian Council Climate Change Strategy - August 2020 
Midlothian Council Climate Change Strategy - August 2020 Action 
8 Award and promote new
developments with  the 
highest standards  in 
sustainability and  climate 
change adaptation  
9 Develop  a carbon offsetting 
scheme to  mitigate the 
carbon impact  
of development  Manager/Service 
Responsible
Peter Arnsdorf Planning 
Manager
Peter Arnsdorf  Planning 
Manager Timetable 
First Awards in 2021 
2024 Outcome
Supplementary Guidance. 
Promotion of biodiversity 
friendly landscaping. 
Compliance with  SUDS best 
practice
Promotion of  best practice. 
Securing carbon  neutral 
development.
Education of the wider value
of trees and open space 2021 Peter Arnsdorf Planning
Manager Identify and adopt accredited
methodology and application
to record and place financial
value on trees and open
space 10 
To communicate to all
Council staff about the
climate change Strategy and
how they can help achieve
its aims Ready for adoption of the
Climate Change Strategy. Peter Arnsdorf Planning
Manager Develop a Learn-Pro module
on the Climate Change
Strategy and Energy
Efficiency. 11 Outcome Timetable Manager/Service
ResponsibleAction Midlothian Council Climate Change Strategy - August 2020 27 
Midlothian Council Climate Change Strategy - August 2020 12 Review other Council’s 
climate change work as part 
of annual  emissions 
reporting 
13 Implementation  of the 
adopted Midlothian  Local 
Biodiversity Action  Plan 
(LBAP) 
14 Identify  Community Climate 
Change Champions  from the 
Midlothian Community  
Planning Partnership  
15 Secure  ‘Green Flag’ status 
for 15 of Midlothian’s schools 
under the  Eco-Schools 
programme (10  schools are
currently green  flagged). Peter Arnsdorf Planning 
Manager
Peter Arnsdorf Planning 
Manager
Alasdair
Mathers,
 Communities and 
Performance Manager 
Justin V enton, Land and 
Countryside Manager 
Sandra Banks,  Resource 
Manager From the 2020 annual 
reporting submission. 
By 2024 
2020
2024 Become aware of best 
practice and learn from other 
Councils. Adapt Midlothian’s 
Strategy as a result
Protection and enhancement 
of biodiversity and climate 
change adaptation. 
Promoting climate  change 
actions across Midlothian. 
To hold the Council to 
account for its climate 
change commitments. 
15 schools  securing ‘Green 
Flag’ status demonstrating 
an improved environmental 
awareness.
Reduce waste. 2024 Chris Lawson, Waste Risk &
Resilience Manager Implement a Council Waste
Strategy across all its 
services. 16 
Contribute to climate change
adaptation.2021 Alan Turpie, Legal Services
Manager Increasing weighting in
Council procurement to
favour firms who can 17 18 Action
demonstrate services that 
contain positive climate 
change adaption measures 
19 Introduce,  where 
appropriate, green  roofs and 
green walls  into new
Council development  
20 Install  electric vehicle 
charging points  on all 
Council owned  
non-residential
properties and  car parks 
21 Draft  and implement an
annual communications  
strategy to  promote ‘Earth 
Hour’. 
22 Promotion  of ‘meat free 
days’ in Council 
buildings/facilities Manager/Service 
Responsible
Gareth Davies,  Property 
Manager
Lindsay Haddow , Policy 
Planning Manager 
David Russell  
CommunicationsDavid Russell
  
Communications Outcome
Increasing habitat  for 
biodiversity. 
Promote and  encourage the 
use of electric vehicles. 
Implementation of  an annual 
communications strategy to 
promote ‘Earth Hour’, raising 
climate change awareness. 
Raising awareness  that
unsustainable agricultural 
practice/food consumption 
contributes towards climate 
change. Timetable 
Reduce use of fossil fuels. 2021 Gareth Davies, Property Use energy suppliers that 
Manager only use renewable sources 
of energy 
2021
2024
2020
2020 28 Midlothian Council Climate Change Strategy - August 2020 
Midlothian Council Climate Change Strategy - August 2020 
Reduce the Council’s carbon
footprint. 2021 Gareth Davies, Property and
Facilities Manager. Draft and implement an up
to date Carbon Management
Plan 23 Outcome Timetable Manager/Service
ResponsibleAction Midlothian Council Climate Change Strategy - August 2020 29 
Midlothian Council Climate Change Strategy - August 2020 24 Draft and implement a Local 
Heat and Energy Efficiency 
Strategy. 
25 Reduce  energy consumption 
in non-domestic  operational 
property stock  by 3% per 
annum. 
26 Replace  75% of street 
lighting lamps  to low energy 
LED lamps.  
27 Continue  to promote an
active travel to work strategy 
– encourage  leaving the car 
at home at least one day a 
week and encourage car
sharing through the Council's 
identified organisation 
https://liftshare.com/uk Gareth Davies, Property and 
Facilities Manager. 
Gareth Davies, Property and 
Facilities Manager. 
Keith Slight  Lighting 
Manager
Lindsay Haddow  Policy 
Planning Manager. 2021
Annual
20242020 Reduce the Council’s carbon 
footprint.
Reduction in carbon footprint 
from energy use.
Reduction in  the Council’s 
carbon footprint and 
promotion of healthy 
lifestyles.
Reduction in  the Council’s 
carbon footprint and 
promotion of healthy 
lifestyles.
Promotion of healthy
lifestyles and reduce
Midlothian’s residents 
dependency on the car. 2024 Lindsay Haddow Policy
Planning Manager Increase Midlothian’s cycle 
path network by 10k. 28 
Increased use of public
transport and reduced
carbon footprint. 2020 Lindsay Haddow Policy
Planning Manager. Explore the possibility of a 
public transport discount
scheme for Council
employees. 29 34 Manager/Service 
Responsible
Lindsay Haddow  Policy 
Planning Manager. 
Ann Marie  Macaskill 
Economic Development 
Manager
Justin V enton, Land and 
Countryside Manager. 
Justin V enton, Land and 
Countryside Manager. 
Justin V enton, Land and 
Countryside Manager. Timetable 
2021
202120202020
2021 Action 
30 Investigate the use of
recycled plastic surface 
materials for  the repair 
and resurfacing  roads. 
31 Develop  a strategy to 
promote local  food 
production. 
32 Use  native bio-diverse rich 
planting species  in Council 
parks and  controlled land to 
promote biodiversity . 
33 Only  use organic fertilisers 
and plant bedding. 
35 Aim  to make the Dalkeith 
Penicuik W alkway 
Scotland’s first  Green Flag 
Awarded cycle  path to 
promote sustainable  travel 
in Midlothian  Outcome
Increasing use  of recycled 
material.
Increased awareness of
local products and reduced 
food miles in purchased 
food.
Protection and enhancement 
of biodiversity and climate 
change adaptation. 
Protection and enhancement 
of biodiversity and climate 
change adaptation. 
Create a wildlife friendly Promote biodiversity by 
implementing an exemplar Countryside Manager. pond in the garden of 
project on Council land. 2024 Justin Venton, Land and 
Fairfield House. 
To promote Active Travel 
across Midlothian. Midlothian Council Climate Change Strategy - August 2020 30 Midlothian Council Climate Change Strategy - August 2020 36 Midlothian Council Climate Change Strategy - August 2020 31 
Midlothian Council Climate Change Strategy - August 2020 Action Manager/Service Timetable Outcome 
Responsible 
Promote Active Travel and Ann-Marie McCasgill, 2021/Ongoing To influence sustainable 
staff travel plans amongst Economic Development travel choices and increase 
businesses and and Third Manager use of staff travel plans in 
Sector organisations via the private and voluntary 
Business Gateway. sectors. Midlothian Council Climate Change Strategy - August 2020 33 
Midlothian Council Climate Change Strategy - August 2020 
Appendix 
Climate Change web links 
Midlothian Council Sustainable  Development and Climate change web site: 
https://www.midlothian.gov.uk/info/1231/environment/445/sustainable_development_ and_climate_change 
Greener Scotland : http://www.greenerscotland.org/ 
Adaptation Scotland  -https://www .adaptationscotland.org.uk/ 
Energy Saving T rust Scotland: https://www.energysavingtrust.org.uk/scotland 
Keep Scotland  Beautiful:  https://www.keepscotlandbeautiful.org/ 
Zero Waste Scotland:  https://energy.zerowastescotland.org.uk/ 
Includes online staff  engagement toolkit and “green champions” training modules/could substitute for 
Learn-Pro module? 
Scottish Government : https://www.gov.scot/policies/climate-change/ 