 
  
MK Sustainability Strategy  
2019 -2050  
Version  2 
December 2018   
  
Document title | Page 2 of 8 
 
 
Foreword  
 
Milton Keynes Council’s Sustainability Strategy 2019 – 2050 is our long -term vision to create a world -
leading sustainable city which embraces innovation, creates high quality jobs and recognises it has a 
vital role in tackling the global challenges of climate change.  
 
Milton Keynes is Different by Design and has always faced challenges with new and e xciting projects 
such as:  
  
 The world’s first modern energy efficient housing at Home World 1981, Energy World 1985 and 
Future World 1994;  
 The first UK city to have kerbside recycling 1989;  
 The first public electric vehicles charging points in 2010.  
 
Milton Keynes is a place where nothing has ever stood still, and innovation is embraced.  We are 
ambitious for the future of Milton Keynes and recognise that being a truly sustainable city will require us 
to work cooperatively with our customers, businesse s and partners, while setting pioneering but 
achievable goals with a clear framework on how to accomplish them.  
 
Milton Keynes will strive to be carbon neutral by 2030 and carbon negative by 2050 while creating one 
of the world’s most truly sustainable eco nomies and models for growth.  
  
Our three priorities as outlined in this strategy are: a green energy revolution, to ensure the most 
efficient and low impact use of our resources, and to create a prosperous circular economy.  
 
These priorities ensure that as Milton Keynes grows we take advantage of the opportunity to do so 
responsibly, creating energy resilience, maximising the use of renewable energy, reducing our water 
usage, minimising transport emissions, ensuring clean air, and an economic system that promotes a 
sustainable economy that addresses the challenges of climate change.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Councillor Peter Marland  
Leader, Milton Keynes Council   
  
Document title | Page 3 of 8 
  
Strategy vision, principles and priorities  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Green energy  
Maximising the use of renewable energy, reducing carbon and providing 
resilience to the grid  
Circular economy  
Increasing the efficient use of resources to reuse materials, use less water, and 
ensure the best use of land  
Low emissions  
Reducing the level of emissions from transport, industry and agriculture and 
ensure clear air  
Milton Keynes can be the world’s greenest and most sustainable city, using 
the opportunities of growth to tackle the challenges of climate change and 
resource competition to create a more prosperous city for all our people and 
future generations which is carbon negative by 2050  Vision  
Forewo
rd 
 Sustainable principles  
 
Priorities for action by 2050  
  
  
Document title | Page 4 of 8 
  
Objectives  
 
Milton Keynes is the most successful new town, with a thriving economy and a high standard of living.  
 
The Council Plan 2016 – 2020 seeks to ensure Milton Keynes remains a city of opportunity for all, a place 
where it is affordable to live in a good home and everyone is able to live a  healthy, active and fulfilled 
life. 
 
However man -made climate change and the over use of global resources is stretching the planet’s 
ability to continue to provide a safe, hospitable environment  for mankind in the long -term.  
 
The UN Paris Climate Agreement (COP21) agreed to seek to limit a global temperature rise to 1.5oC. 
Limiting man -made temperature increases to this level will likely limit the most serve impacts of climate 
change globally . Temperature rises above this level would likely  result in severe and profound changes 
to the environment, driving extremes such as drough t and famine in some areas and flooding in other. 
Such circumstances  would drive global turmoil, increase unco ntrolled migration  of populations , 
devastate  economies and undermine a safe, prosperous future for future generations.  
 
Other factors are already  driving significant change, such as high levels of species extinction and over 
intensification  of land use reducing  the availability  of water.  
 
Milton Keynes cannot  stand aside from the potential  impact of such issues.  
 
The IPCC’s Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5°C, published  in November 2018 , describes the 
enormous harm that a 2°C rise is likely to cause compared to a 1.5°C rise, yet told us that limiting Global 
Warming to 1.5°C may still be possible with ambitious action from national and local government, cities, 
civil society, the private sector, and local communities . 
 
Cities are uniquely  placed as both potential drivers of global  climate change, but as pioneering  agents of 
change. Cities such as Milton Keynes cannot  wait for national governments to agree international terms 
of for action, and Milton Keynes cannot  just act now, but needs to do so in an ambitious  and globally 
defini ng way to show that a sustainable  future is possible.  
 
Sustainable outcomes we are seeking  
 
 Use less carbon than we are able to capture;  
 Contribute positively to action on climate change;  
 A more sustainably designed city;  
 A transition to low -cost renewable  energy sources;  
 A sustainable green economy with well -paid jobs;  
 Reduce the consumption of resources without sacrificing economic development;  
 A diverse, green and bio -diverse environment;  
 Less use of water;  
 Clean air;  
 A healthier and more sustainably conscious population.  
 
The objective of this strategy is to set out our intentions to be the Greenest City in the World, and set 
a framework for how to intend to do this.  
  
  
Document title | Page 5 of 8 
  
Green energy  
 
Energy is  essential in our everyday lives  whether at home or at work or in leisure . We expect continuous  
and reliable energy  connections  and, regardless of the physical infrastructure , where we are  and the 
supply network s that create  them.  
 
With the ever increasing energy costs to the homeowner, tenants and businesses , it 
is paramount that Local Authorities  ensure that investment in the energy 
infrastructure of the city is main tained. Milton Keynes Council is committed to 
enabling and securing private and public investment in the energy  infrastructure 
within the borough.  
 
The resilience of the national energy infrastructure is one area where we can focus 
on delivering alternative and renewable sources of energy rather than the current 
reliance on fossil fuels. W e will ensure that we are proactive in taking forward 
comprehensive, credible initiatives to secure funding and continuing the drive to 
improve the energy effici ency of the existing buildings across the city. Our 
commitment to delivering renewable energy sources i s evidenced in a number of 
projects.  
 
What we’ve done  
 
The council has installed a photo -voltaic (PV) arrays on the 
Civic Offices and Wolverton Depot producing electricity and 
therefore reducing the amount of electricity it has to buy.  
 
Combined heat and power (CHP) plants have been installed 
in Putnam House and Lincoln Court which are sheltered 
housing blocks  
 
The Residual Waste Treatme nt Facility (RWTF) which the 
council built processes around 110,000 tonnes of residual waste and produces enough energy to power 
between 10 to 12,000 homes.  
 
Our aims - what we will do by 2050  
 
 All new developments to include green energy generation schemes;  
 MK Council to produce and distribute energy;  
 Council procurement to drive low carbon suppliers;  
 Use energy efficient and carbon passive technology on new and existing buildings;  
 Drive lower and more efficient energy use.  
 
 
 
 Maximise use 
of renewable 
energy from a 
variety of 
sources and 
provide 
greater 
resilien ce to 
the national 
grid locally  
 
New developments across the 
city should have photo voltaics to 
create their own electricity; 
battery storage faci lities within 
houses and commercial buildings 
will secure energy resilience; we 
can ensure all waste created is 
reused to create alternative 
forms of energy   
  
Document title | Page 6 of 8 
  
Circular economy  
 
Milton Keynes Council’s vision to have a sustainable future means we need to rethink the way our 
economy uses resources. A circular economy is one which seeks to maximise the use we get from our 
resources by reducing waste from leakage, ensuring better use of materials, more refurbishing and 
recycling, and producing less waste . 
 
We are passionate about delivering a  sustainable future for the city, which 
can continue to be prosperous, but where we can work with our partners 
and producers  to ensure that resources  are used wisely . This will mean  we 
are able to continue  to be a prosperous and successful place, ensuring we 
continue our heritage of sustainable green space.  
 
The challenge of climate change  reaches all our lives, where simple 
solutions  can help solve major issues.  
 
The world faces a global  crisis where entire species are facing extinction, 
not just of prestige  mammals, but biodiversity on local land of insects and creatures such as bees, 
hedgehogs  and birds. We can use the green and rural environment  of Milton Keynes to the advantage  of 
our aims, using land to capture car bon and increase biodiversity. Population growth a nd increased 
industrial  usage  also places pressure on the provi sion and level of water use.  
 
We will use our successful economy to encourage change f rom a place of strength, transitioning  to a 
green economy  to create jobs  and base more production locally , while the reuse of materials and the 
ability to reduce waste is something everyone can contribute to.  
 
The council fleet of vehicles could become gas powered and be fuelled from the output from the 
green/garden waste collection that is currently undertak en. The migration to gas powered vehicles 
improves the air quality and if excess gas is created from the waste collection it can also be used to drive 
a turbine to produce electricity for wider use.  
 
What we’ve done  
 
Encouraging  bio-diversity across the ci ty is underway as landscaping grid road corridors is graded to 
ensure the grass is managed to encourage more plants to grow and more animals to live there.  
 
The council has reduced the amount of single use plastics it uses itself while our pioneering Mate rials 
Recycling Facility already increases the level of waste salvaged for recycling  that would have otherwise  
ended its useful life.  
 
Milton Keynes has world -leading businesses such as Bridgman & Bridgman that highlight that there is no 
need to compromise  sustainable  principles for economic growth.  
 
 
 
 
 Circular economies 
will encourage the re -
use of all resources. 
The use of land to 
capture and store 
carbon wil l be a key 
driver in the future   
  
Document title | Page 7 of 8 
  
Our aims - what we will do by 2050  
 
 Focus on encouraging green jobs and inward investment;  
 Encourage more local food and materials production ; 
 Continue the green heritage of Milton Keynes;  
 Ensure excellent sus tainable design;  
 Use more land to capture and store carbon;  
 Work with all landowners to encourage biodiversity;  
 Promote low impact and sustainable building methods and materials;  
 Continue to encourage waste reduction, reusing and recycling;  
 Ensure better w ater management and usage.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
Document title | Page 8 of 8 
  
Low emissions  
 
Carbon Dioxide (CO2) is the primary cause  of man -made global climate 
change. Industrialisation, increased  energy usage from fossil fuels and 
the destruction of natural carbon -sinks such as rain forests increase the 
risk of global  temperatures  increasing more than the 1.5oC ceiling  by 
2050 unless sustained and direct action is taken to cut emission levels.  
 
However  the contribution to climate  change and a liveable  environment 
is about all emissions, not just carbon . 
 
Carbon dioxide, emissions that contribute  to global warming  and other 
pollutants w hich harm the environment  not only have a high -level impact, but directly affect  the health  
and wellbeing of our local population.  
 
We wa nt to eliminate all harmful emissions to drive a better environment , from reducing  emissions that 
contribute to the warming  of the planet, to reducing  particulates that drive poor air quality.  
 
What we’ve done  
 
Milton Keynes already has made significant moves to reducing the carbon emissions, achieving a 38% 
reduction in emissions since 2005. This figure takes into account  the emissions from transport, industry 
and agriculture and the initiatives being undertaken by all individuals, groups and businesses will 
continue to feed into the nationally monitored figures.  
 
Milton Keynes has the first Electric Vehicle (EV) experienc e centre in Europe and has an extensive EV 
charging infrastructure across the city , with over 250 charging posts and around 70 rapid chargers. 
Combined with the first of a kind  electric bus route and the first UK site for electric dockless bike 
scheme , we ca n build continue to build a city that is fit for the future.  
 
Our aims - what we will do by 2050  
 
 Seek to be a carbon neutral by 2030, and carbon negative by 2050;  
 Reduce transport emissions by promoting low -emission vehicles and public transport;  
 Ensure the source of transport power is sustainable;  
 Have the best urban air -quality in the UK, especially around public buildings;  
 Robustly monitor emissions and air quality  
 
Corporate actions to implement this strategy  
 
 Work across systems to ensure sustainability is designed into our city -wide thinking;  
 Review the strategy and consult widely to produce a Sustainability Delivery Plan every four 
years;  
 Bring together all partners across the city to implement the desired outcomes;  
 Provide local, nationa l and global leadership for cities on climate action;  
 Establish a robust and effective monitoring system to ensure outcomes are achieved.  Milton Keynes will be 
the world’s greenest 
and most sustainable 
city by becoming 
carbon neutral by 
2030 and carbon 
negative by 2050  
 