 
1 
  
Monmouthshire County Council  
Climate Emergency Strategy  
Octo ber 2019  
 
 
2 
 Title Climate Emergency  Strategy  
Purpose  This strategy outlines the council ’s response  to the climate 
emergency declared in May 2019  
Owner  Monmouthshire County Council  
Approved by  County Council, 24th October 2019  
Date  Octobe r 2019  
Version Number  1.0 
Status  Final  
Review Frequency  Annual  
Next review date  September 2020  
Consultation  Strong Communities Select Committee (open to all members) on 
26th September  2019 . 
 
 
   
3 
 Foreword  
The purpose of Monmouthshire County Council is building sustainable and resilient communities.   
This feels more relevant than ever.  In 2019 n o one can be blind  to the threat that climate change 
poses to our eco -system s, our local environment and our way of life .  Carbon emissions from fossil 
fuels are one of the main causes  of climate change  and as a council we are striving to become 
carbon neutral by 2030.   
If we are to stand a chance of slowing the rise in the Earth’s temperature we need to act now.  
Earlier this year councillors in Monmouthshire we re unanimous in declaring a climate emergency .  
We intend to play our part in tack ling this issue and we will wor k with communities and local 
businesses to help them reduce their e missions.  This will require  engagement, community 
involvement  and commitments from third parties.  
We have made a start:  
 We have called for our pension fund to divest its fossil fuel investments  and have seen the 
proportion of the fund invested in such firms decline from  9.10% to 6.95% since 2018 ; 
 We have built a solar farm which  contributes  towards the £650 ,000 worth of renewable 
energy  we put into  to the national grid each year;   
 More than 99% of the energy we buy comes from renewable sources . 
And we will continue to do more:  
 Develop ing an investment programme to help our services transition to a low carbon future  
 Piloting the use of locally designed and built hydrogen powered cars ; 
 Trialling digital solutions which make it easier  for people to travel through better use of 
existing transport capacity ; 
 Installing  a network of charging points for electric vehicles . 
We will do this while continui ng to provide the services  which  form part of the social foundation s on 
which our communities are built .  We know that this will not be easy.   It needs bold thinking and we 
don’t yet have all of the answers.   Monmouthshire is blessed with a rich tapestry of caring and 
committed people, b usinesses and community groups that make this place what it is.  Now, perhaps 
more than at any time in the past, we need everyone to get behind this commitment and play their 
part in securing a better tomorrow.  
 
 
Cllr Jane Pratt,  
Cabinet Member for Infrastructure and Neighbourhood Services    
 
4 
 Monmouthshire 2030: A Carbon Neutral Council  
Why this matters?  
Tackling climate change  and moving to a low carbon economy  is one of the biggest challenges facing 
our society.   Rising temperatures bring increased risks to  our communities and  are causing long -term 
and potentially irreversible damage  to our planet ’s eco -system s, with significant  local  impacts such as 
flooding and loss of species.1 By 2030 this council aspires to reduce its  net carbon emissions to zero 
while continuing to deliver important local services to our  communities . 
Carbon  emissions from fossil fuels are  one of the main causes of climate change. The scientific 
consensus is that human activity  since industrialisation  has been the  major  factor in the recent 
warming of the Earth’s surface.  It will take action and ingenuity from humans to halt it.  
Climate change, deforestation and agriculture 
mean the ability of the planet to lock up carbon 
is reducing.  Soil is being e roded at a quicker 
rate than new soil can be formed while melting 
ice is contributing to rising sea levels and 
releasing carbon previously trapped beneath 
frozen land.  These changes result in feedback 
loops where rising temperatures accelerate the 
degrada tion of land and soil through drought, 
desertification and r ising sea levels.  This in turn  
increases the volume of greenhouse gases 
being release d by land , further accelerating  
global warming.  
Time to Act  
If we are to sta nd a chance of addressing climate change and slowing the rise in the Earth’s 
temperature there is a nar row window of opportunity to take action .  The International Panel on 
Climate Change has indicated that rises above 1.5 °C will affect the ability of the p lanet to sustain 
human life as we know it and that crucially , without significant change , that figure will be passed by 
2030.  In short , we don’t have long to act.  
In May 2019 Monmouthshire County Council  unanimously passed a motion declaring a climate 
eme rgency2.  This sets out a clear policy commitment for the council to:  
 strive to reduce its own carbon emissions to net zero in line with the Welsh Government target 
of 2030 ; 
 encourage and support resident s and businesses to take their own actions to reduce  their 
carbon emissions ; 
 Work with partners across the county and other councils and organisations to help develop 
and implement best practice methods in limiting global warming to less than 1.5 °C . 
This must be done while continuing to provide the services which create  the social foundations our 
communities are built upon and which no -one should be without.  These include the commitments 
within the council’s Social Justice Strategy.  Our challenge is  to find a way to exist in the safe space 
between the ecological limits of the planet while continuing to provide these social foundations3.  The 
Cabinet Member  for Infrastruc ture and Neighbourhood Services will chair a group to oversee progress 
and ensure  that the council’s plans are continually challenged to reduce carbon and incorporate 
 
5 
 emerging technology and concepts.  This will require bold thinking, we do not yet have all of the 
answers and will continue to seek out the people, ideas and evidence abo ut what works  and apply this 
in Monmouthshire.   
 
The Benefits  of Action  
As well as the global and moral imperative to act on climate change we can also expect to see  
multiple  local benefits from moving to a lower carbon society:  
 Lower energy bil ls for res idents and businesses  
 Better air quality and  the resulting health benefits  
 Shorter commuting  times between home, work and  school  
 Increased  use of active travel like walking and cycling which can help improve peoples’ 
health  
 Less damage to the local environment from drought, floods and fire  
 Increased demand for green technologies and the resulting potential f or job growth in these 
sectors  
 Better habitat management, increased biodiversity and creation of green space  
 Increased connectivity between people and the environment and more globally  responsible 
citizens  
 
Local Carbon Emissions  
Climate is a global issue  but we  all have a part to play.  If we are to reduce our net emissions we 
need to understand what they  are now – both in our county and our  organisation.  Emissions per 
head of population  across  Monmouthshire are above UK levels.  Since 2005 net carbon emissions in 
the county have reduced by 28%  from 903  kilotonnes  to 648 kilotonnes  per year  while ou r 
population has increased by 7%4.   Althou gh the emissions have reduced, this is still a weight the 
equivalent of 54,000 London double decker buses.  
 
(Source: UK local authority dioxide emissions, National Statistics)  
The downward trajectory  mirrors  a similar trend  as across the UK as a result  of things like an 
increase in the use of cleaner energy.   Over this time we have  also seen an increase in carbon 
captured  in the county  from 17 to 43 kilotonnes but the amount captured is less than 7% of the total 
 
6 
 CO 2 produced5.  If decarbonisation were t o continue at this rate we would not be carbo n neutral 
until after 2050 , too late to prevent catastrophic climate change.   We need to do more.  
Carbon emissions in the county come from a range of sources including industry, agriculture, road 
transport and d omestic homes .  The biggest single contributor is transport and in particular road 
transport.  This is shown in the chart below6: 
      
(Source: UK local authority dioxide emissions, National Statistics)  
 
Monmouthshire County Council will strive to reduc e its own emissi ons while working with partners, 
including members of the Public Service Board, local businesses and community groups to reduce 
emissions and improve carbon capture across the county as a whole from things like trees, 
vegetation and green infrastructure which help to sequester and store carbon.  
Data from our own organisation shows that we generate approximately:  
 8,700 tonnes from static assets such as buildings and street lighting  (the weight of 725 
double decker buses)  
 3,000 tonnes from council vehicles  like buses and refuse trucks, plus cars  driven by officers 
and councillors in the course of their work  (250 double decker buses)  
 15,000 tonnes of emissions from the manufacture of the good and supplies we buy  (1,250 
double decker buses).  
This is still an incomplete picture and we will increase our understanding as our work develops.  
 
We’ve made a start… but have a lot more to do  
The Council are already taking steps to reduce our carbon emissions.  This  infographic shows some 
of the  work that is already underway in Monmouthshire7. 
 
  
 
7 
  
 
  
 
8 
 Our Objectives  at a Glance  
Our action plan cover s ten broad objectives that will deliver a net reduction in carbon emissions by 
2030.  Each of these objectives contain s actions for the local authority  which will reduce the 
council’s own emissions, as well as actions that will reduce county wide carbon emissions which will 
need to be taken forward in partnership with the community , plus steps that everyone can do.       
The action plan  contained  as an appendix to the strategy is not the finished article.  It  will be 
updated  and reported on annually, but the actions will be continuous,  as we look  globally for 
examples of leading edge practice that can help us accelerate our progress .   It contains  an initial and 
high level of assessment of impact, cost and feasibility. Low cost actions are those below £5,000, 
medium are those between £5,000 and £50,000 and high cost are those above £50,000.  Our priority 
will be to  put our energy and investment int o those that offer the most advantageous balance of 
carbon reduction and feasibility.  We also need to ensure some  early actions to  get the maximum 
cumulative benefit over the next twelve years.   
Energy and Buildings   Renewable Energy  
Reduce  the amount of energy that is used for 
buildings and street lighting   Speed up the move  from  fossil fuels to 
renewable energy  
   
Green Spaces   What  we Buy  
Create and m anage green spaces to absorb 
carbon &  provide resilience to climate change   Reduce carbon by thinking carefully about 
when and what we buy  and the whole life costs  
   
Waste   Active Travel  
Reduce waste by encouraging people to 
reduce, re -use and recycle more   Encourage and make it easier for people  to 
walk and cycle rather than drive  
   
Greener Transport   Public Transport  
Reduce the impac t of vehicles and encourage 
the use of electric and hydrogen vehicles   Encourage  people to use public transport 
rather than cars  
   
Education and involvement   Climate Adaptation  
Help people understand climate change and 
what they can do to make a difference   Preparing  and adapt ing for the impact of 
climate change.  
 
Playing your part  
The Climate Emergency Action Plan cannot be delivered by the Council alone .  We need other 
partners to join us in helping to reduce carbon emissions across the county.  To that end, we will be 
working with Public Service Board partners over coming months.   
We hugely value the enthusiasm, energy and expertise of the residents of  Monmouthshire who have 
such a lot to contribute , and we plan to collaborate with our communities and other partners to 
work together on our action plan.  This process began at the end of July  2019  with a Community 
Climate Champions workshop to begin to id entify where they can help us deliver.  
There are things that every resident, visitor or worker in Monmouthshire can do to play their part in 
reducing carbon emissions and helping to slow down climate change.  We are all part of the 
problem, but can all be part of the solution too.     
9 
 Climate Adaptation  
Even if we were to stop all carbon emissions 
today, we will still have to face the i mpacts of 
climate change that are  already happening .  
Over the next  few decades we are facing 
some level of climate change regardless of any 
action to reduce our emissions now. The 2012 
Climate Change Risk Assessment for Wales 
forecasts hotter, drier summers, warmer, 
wetter winters and more extreme weather 
events.   
There are lots of things that the council is 
doing to make su re that we are prepared for the impacts of climate change.  In recent years, council 
services have thought about what the potential risks to their services are, in order to start thinking 
about how to adapt to these risks.   The Local Development Plan has a  key role to play in making sure 
that our communities are sustainable and resilient to the impacts of climate change.  
With an increase in winter rainfall and rising sea levels, flooding is likely to increase, and this will be a 
particular concern in parts of Monmouthshire.  Much of  the work to co -ordinate emergency 
responses is organised through the Gwent Local Resilience  Forum (LRF).  We will continue to work 
with partners on the LRF to make sure that we are prepared for severe weather events.  
If you live somewhere prone to flooding, make sure you know what to do. Find out more at 
https://www.monmouthshire.gov.uk/services/planning -for-emergencies/flooding/  
Keeping tabs on how we are doing  
It is important that we know w hether the actions we will be taking to reduce climate change are 
making a difference to our emissions.  We can measure how much carbon some of the actions will 
save.  However, we will not be able to measure carbon savings from some of the actions, but we can 
at least make sure that we are doing what we have said we will do.  
We will be starting a member led working group, to be chaired by the cabinet member (with 
community and officers) which will  meet quarterly.   Updates on progress against the actions will be 
collated every three  months and reported to the working g roup  to make sure that we are making 
good progress.  
  
 
10 
 Our Commitment to Action  
Addressing climate change will require collaboration and the commitment o f many people.  We are 
determined to play our part and the a ctions that Monmouthshire County Council is committed to 
include:  
 We have built a solar farm which  contributes towards the £650 ,000 worth  of renewable 
energy to the national grid each year, and will invest in more renewable schemes when the 
national grid has enough capacity  
 We have called for our pension fund to divest its fossil fuel investments and have seen the 
proportion of the fund invested in such firms decline from  9.10% to 6.95% since 2018;  
 Develop an investment programme to help our services transition to a low carbo n future  
 Transition the council’s transport fleet to hybrid, electric and hydrogen vehicles as these 
become available  
 Pilot the use of locally designed and built hydrogen powered cars ; 
 Trial  digital solutions for next generation transport schemes that  mak e it easier for people to 
travel by making better use of existing transport capacity;  
 Install  a network of charging points for electric vehicles.  
 Recruit a member of staff to develop, promote and secure funding for active travel schemes 
to reduce car journ eys while increasing walking and cycling  
 Install photovoltaic canopies at council owned car parks to power electric vehicle charge 
points with renewable energy  
 Plant 10,000 new trees by 2022  
 Make all of our buildings water refill stations and eliminate sin gle use plastics from all 
council -run premises  
 Promote Monmouthshire as a test -bed for companies looking to trial low carbon 
technologies in a  rural setting  
 
 
   
11 
  
 
 
 
Appendix A  
Climate Emergency Action Plan  
   
12 
  
Reducing energy use  
Reducing the amount of energy that is used for buildings and street 
lighting  
  
Action to reduce MCC emissions  CO2 
reduction  Cost  to 
Taxpayer  Feasibility  
New council buildings will operate with net zero carbon 
emissions by 2025 or use carbon offsetting where this cannot 
be achieved  Low High  Medium  
Implement energy efficiency improvements across the existing 
council estate by 2022  Medium  High  Medium  
Reduce CO2 emissions from our energy supply  Low High  Easier  
All remaining street lighting  will be converted  to LED  bulbs  Low Medium  Easier  
All bulbs within council owned buildings will be LED  Low Medium  Easier  
  
Action to reduce County  emissions  CO2 
reduction  Cost  to 
Taxpayer  Feasibility  
Use planning policy to insist on  higher energy standards for 
new buildings  Medium  Low Harder  
Reduce carbon emissions across a ll public service buildings in 
in the county  in partnership with the Public Service Board  Medium  Low Easier  
Promote minimum energy standards in private owned 
accommodation  Low Low Medium  
  
What can I do to play my part?  
 
Make sure you have got dra ught proofing and loft and cavity wall insulation in your home – save 
money and energy. https://www.energysavingtrust.org.uk/home -insulation   
Simple things like switching off the lights, not leaving things on standby and only boiling the water you 
really need in the kettle can really make a difference. https://www.energysavingtrust.org.uk/home -
energy -efficiency   
Understand how your heating controls work and using thermostats properly can save energy.  
If you use a dishwasher, make  sure you only use it when full.  
Make sure your washing machine in full and dry clothes on a line rather than tumble dry if you can.  
Reducing 
energy use  
  
13 
  
Using renewable energy  
Speed up the move  from fossil fuels to renewable energy  
 
  
Action to  reduce MCC emissions  CO2 
reduction  Cost  to 
Taxpayer  Feasibility  
Build and operate two new  solar farms  – subject to national grid 
capacity  High  High  Medium  
Develop  proposals for  a district heating scheme  High  High  Medium  
Develop a Whole System Smart Energy Plan as part of  Cardiff 
Capital Region Approach  High  High  Harder  
Install photovoltaic canopies at council owned car parks to power 
electric vehicle charge points with renewable energy  Medium  High  Medium  
  
Action to reduce County  emissions  CO2 
reduction  Cost  to 
Taxpayer  Feasibility  
Require renewable energy on private sector developments  Medium  Low Harder  
Identify areas for renewable generation in the new Local 
Development Plan  Medium  Low Medium  
  
What can I do to play my part?  
 
Switch your energy supplier to a renewable energy contract. 
https://www.moneysupermarket.com/gas -and-electricity/green -energy -tariffs/   
Find out whether you could i nstall solar panels or another renewable energy in your home. 
https://www.energysavingtrust.org.uk/renewable -energy   
Consider what you want your savings or pensions to be invested in. 
https://www.finder.com/ca/ethical -savings -accounts   
 
 
 
 
Using 
renewable 
energy  
  
14 
  
Managing green spaces  
To reduce energy use, to absorb carbon and be resilient  
  
Action to reduce MCC emissions  CO2 
reduction  Cost  to 
taxpayer  Feasibility  
Eliminate the use of peat based compost by our grounds 
maintenance teams  Low Low Easier  
Expand pollinator friendly management work and reduce grass 
cutting frequency/extent where appropriate and safe  Low Low Easier  
Generate renewable energy from grass cuttings through anaerobic 
digestion  Low Low Medium  
Plant 10,000 new trees by 2022   Low Medium  Medium  
Use our county farms as exemplars for sustainable agriculture.  Low Medium  Medium  
Use low carbon building technologies like green walls or roofs  Low Medium  Medium  
  
Action to reduce County  emissions  CO2 
reduction  Cost  to 
taxpayer  Feasibility  
Promote sustainable land management and agricultural practices, 
including nutrient/soil management and natural flood management  High  High  Harder  
Maintain & enhance biodiversity & make ecosystems more resilient  Medium  Medium  Medium  
Plant more trees and increase area of woodland, improve and 
increase woodland management and retain existing woodland  Medium  Medium  Medium  
Secure more green infrastructure through development  Low Low Easier  
Promote and support local food growing  Low Medium  Medium  
Reduce food miles by w ork with local fa rmers to market local food  Low Low Easier  
Ensure per meable materials  and water storage is incorporated into 
new car parks  Low High  Medium  
What can I do to play my part?  
Leave part of your garden wild,  make habitats for wildlife and plant trees to absorb carbon dioxide. 
https://www.wildlifetrusts.org/actions   
Join a “Friends of” group to get involved in sustainable green space management, or find out about 
local groups who are doing community gardening and growing. https://www.farmgarden.org.uk/   
Try and reduce yo ur food miles by buying food which is locally grown where possible and in season.  
Think about where meat you buy comes from and have a varied diet with plenty of fruit and vegetables  
Get involved in community allotments or establish a new allotment  and have a go and growing your 
own fruit and veg .https://www.theallotmentgarden.co.uk/ Easier -grow/  
  
Managing 
green 
spaces  
  
15 
  
 
 
What we buy  
Reducing carbon by thinking carefully about when and what we buy  
and whole life costs  
 
  
Action to reduce MCC emissions  CO2 
reduction  Cost  to 
taxpayer  Feasibility  
Eliminate  single use plastics within the council  Low Low Easier  
Phase out fossil fuel investments  from our pension fund  High  High  Harder  
All tender document will contain criteria to  address climate 
emergency commitments  Low Low Medium  
Incorporate climate and decarbonisation into  strategic 
procurement collaborations  Low Low Medium  
  
What can I do to play my part?  
 
Think about how much you buy and whether you really need it.  
When you are buying food think local, in season, reduced and recyclable packaging.  
Support your local charity shop and buy second hand, or use schemes such as Freecycle 
https://www.freecycle.org/  
Consider buying “experiences” for people as gifts, or charity gifts that support sustainable projects, 
rather than buy gifts that aren’t wanted or needed. https://www.oxfam.org.uk/shop/oxfam -
unwrapped  
 
 
What we 
buy 
  
16 
  
Reducing waste  
By encouraging people to reduce, re -use and recycle more  
 
  
Action to reduce MCC emissions  CO2 
reduction  Cost  to 
taxpayer  Feasibility  
Reduce waste and  increase recycling in all public spaces including 
retail centres   Low Medium  Medium  
Reduce food waste in schools  Low Medium  Harder  
  
Action to reduce County  emissions  CO2 
reduction  Cost  to 
taxpayer  Feasibility  
Make all of our buildings water refill stations   Low Low Easier  
Support , promote and expand the Repair Cafes and Upcycle 
movement  Low Low Easier  
Roll out re -use shops at Household Waste sites, and use revenue to 
fund tree planting  Low Medium  Medium  
Increase ‘reduce , re-use and recycling’ across the county  Medium  Medium  Medium  
Build a new high quality recycling facility in central Monmouthshire  Medium  High  Medium  
Require all households to recycle  Low Medium  Harder  
  
What can I do to play my part?  
 
Find out about and use all the different types of recycling that Monmouthshire does. 
https://www.monmouthshire.gov.uk/recycling -and-waste/   
Get recipes and tips for using food and redu cing food waste. https://lovefoodhatewaste.com/   
Use refillable water bottles, and reusable containers for your lunch. https://refill.org.uk/   
Try and  cut down on single use plastics. https://www.sas.org.uk/plastic -free-communities/   
Look after your clothes and don’t buy disposable fashion. https://www.loveyourclothes.org.uk/   
Donate unwanted clothes, bric -a-brac, books, furniture etc . to your local charity shop to reduce landfill 
and help raise money.  
 
 
 
Reducing 
waste  
  
17 
  
 
Walking and cycling  
Encouraging and making it easier for people to walk and cycle rather 
than drive  
 
  
Action to reduce MCC emissions  CO2 
reduction  Cost  to 
taxpayer  Feasibility  
Improve and expand  our cycle and footpath network . Medium  High  Medium  
Develop a bike share scheme   Low Medium  Medium  
Fit bike carriers to buses to encourage cycling   Low Medium  Medium  
Introduce cycling mileage rates  for staff to incentivise active travel 
over car journeys  Low Low Easier  
Reduce business miles travelled by  staff  25% by 2023 through use 
of technology  Medium  Medium  Medium  
  
Action to reduce County  emissions  CO2 
reduction  Cost  to 
taxpayer  Feasibility  
Develop  e-bike and cycle hire schemes beginning in town centres  Low Medium  Medium  
Develop schemes that will i ncrease walking and cycling to school  Medium  Medium  Medium  
Introduce no idling near schools, and other appropriate locations  Low Low Easier  
Maximise opportunities for active travel, ensuring routes are safe 
and convenient  Medium  Low Medium  
  
What can I  do to play my part?  
 
Try and walk for short journeys, and reduce carbon while getting fit at the same time!  
Find out about local cycle routes and cycling groups and get on your bike. 
https://www.sustrans.org.uk/national -cycle -network/  
Team up with parents and your local school to develop a walking bus to walk your little ones to school.  
Get involved with local public rights of way volunteering opportunities. 
https://volunteer.monmouthshire.gov.uk/   
Ask your employer if they can provide showers and lockers so that you can cycle to work.  
 
 
 
Walking 
and cycling  
  
18 
  
 
Greener vehicles  
Reducing the impact of vehicle use and encouraging use of electric and 
hydrogen vehicles  
 
  
Action to reduce MCC emissions  CO2 
reduction  Cost  to 
taxpayer  Feasibility  
Introduce a green travel plan for staff and councillor travel  Low Low Easier  
Increase the mileage rates payabl e for staff  who use electric 
vehicles  relative to petrol and diesel cars  Low Low Easier  
Install EV charging points at all larger  council buildings  Low High  Medium  
Transition the council’s transport fleet to hybrid, electric and 
hydrogen veh icles as these become available  Medium  Medium  Medium  
  
Action to reduce County  emissions  CO2 
reduction  Cost  to 
taxpayer  Feasibility  
Provide  free car parking in MCC owned car parks for electric and 
hydrogen vehicles until 2025  Low High  Medium  
Encourage the use of  electric or hybrid  taxis  Low Low Harder  
Use parking and speed enforcement  to prevent traffic congestion 
and minimise  air pollution  Low Low Harder  
Launch the Riversimple hydrogen car pilot in Abergavenny  Low High  Medium  
Develop proposals  for EV charging  in street lights and new housing 
developments  Medium  High  Medium  
  
What can I do to play my part?  
 
Try and car share when you can, to save fuel and money.  There are schemes to help. 
https://liftshare.com/uk  
If you are thinking of replacing your vehicle, think about whether an electric car would work for you.  
There are grants which can help. https://www .energysavingtrust.org.uk/transport/electric -cars-and-
vehicles/electric -vehicles  
 
 
Greener 
vehicles  
  
19 
  
Public transport  
Encouraging people to use public transport rather than cars  
 
  
Action to reduce MCC emissions  CO2 
reduction  Cost  to 
taxpayer  Feasibility  
Develop a business case to move to an electric bus fleet  Low High  Medium  
Trial digital solutions for nex t generation transport schemes that 
make  better use  of existing transport capacity  Medium  High  Harder  
  
Action to reduce County  emissions  CO2 
reduction  Cost  to 
taxpayer  Feasibility  
Encourage modal shift through the South Wales Metro  High  High  Harder  
Continue to make the case to national governments for improved 
train frequencies and  station provision  Low Medium  Medium  
Develop a ‘R ural Uber ’ scheme linked to train stations  Medium  High  Medium  
  
What can I do to play my part?  
 
Find out about public transport options that could work for you.  https://www.traveline.cymru/  
If you are 16 to 21  you can get bus travel discounts. https://mytravelpass.gov.wales/en/  
If you are 16 to 25 you can apply for a young persons railcard. https://www.16 -25railcard.co.uk/  
Concessionary bus passes are available from Transport for Wales. https://tfw.gov.wales/  
 
  
Public 
transport  
  
20 
  
 
Education and involvement  
Helping people understand climate change and what they can do to 
make a difference  
 
  
Action to reduce MCC emissions  CO2 
reduction  Cost  to 
taxpayer  Feasibility  
Make energy data available to schools  and encourage pupils to get 
involved in managing energy  consumption  Low Low Easier  
Introduce carbon literacy training for all council staff  Low Low Medium  
Change the council’s default  internet  search engine to Ecosia  which 
plants a tree for every search made  Low Low Easier  
  
Action to reduce County  emissions  CO2 
reduction  Cost  to 
taxpayer  Feasibility  
Work with community groups to develop  an Internet of Things 
sensor network to inform decisions and educate local communities   Medium  Medium  Harder  
Start local growing and cooking schemes in schools  Low Medium  Easier  
Use the One Planet Centre as a focus for climate change education  Low Low Easier  
  
What can I do to play my part?  
 
Get involved with your school’s Eco Committee, or if your school isn’t an Eco School, find out more and 
ask them if they would consider it. https://www.keepwalestidy.cymru/pages/category/eco -schools  
Does your workplace have recycling or other environmental issues in place?  Why not try and start 
something.  
Get involved with one of the many voluntary groups in Monmouthshire doing great work on climate 
change. https://www.transitionchepstow.org.uk/   https://t ransitionmonmouth.org/   
http://abergavennytransition.org/  https://www.facebook.com/AbergavennyExtinctionRebellion/  
 
Education 
and 
involvement  
  
21 
 References  
 
1 https://www.ipcc.ch/2018/10/08/summary -for-policymakers -of-ipcc-special -report -on-global -warming -of-1-
5c-approved -by-governments/   
2 https://democracy.monmouthshir e.gov.uk/ieListDocuments.aspx?CId=143&MId=3758   
3 Doughnut Economics (2017); Raworth, Kate  
4 UK local authority and regional carbon dioxide emissions national statistics: 2005 -2016 , full dataset and 
methodology available at https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/uk -local -authority -and-regional -
carbon -dioxide -emissions -national -statistics   
5 LULUCF Net Emissions  (land use,  land use change and forestry) total. Ibid  
6 2016 data for Monmouthshire. Ibid  
7 Council Data for 2018/19                                                             