Newark and Sherwood District Council 
Climate Emergency Strategy
September 2020Foreword 2
Climate Emergency Declaration 3
Purpose of Climate Emergency Strategy 4
Newark & Sherwood District Council Carbon Footprint 6
NSDC Climate Emergency Target 7
Other carbon reduction opportunities 13
Emissions from Council owned housing 16
Emission Reduction Action Plan 18
Link to broader Council policies & strategies 19
Governance, Monitoring and Reporting 20
Engagement 21
Appendices 22ContentsForeword
Introduction from Cllr David Lloyd, Leader of Newark and Sherwood District Council
To be completedIntroduction from David Reilly, Director of Cities and Regions 
at the Carbon Trust
In June 2019, the UK Government committed to reducing the UK’s net 
emissions of greenhouse gases by 100% relative to 1990 levels by 2050. 
The public sector is key to delivering this ambition.
There is a global movement of local authorities declaring climate emergencies. Declarations 
have been made in over 20 countries, by local authorities representing around 290 million 
people. By declaring a climate emergency, local authorities are acknowledging the need to 
act on the causes and impacts of climate change. However, delivering on these declarations 
requires robust and measurable change with support of a viable action plan to promote 
transparency and accountability.
The Carbon Trust is pleased to have partnered with Newark and Sherwood District Council on 
its Climate Emergency Strategy and Emissions Reduction Action Plan. The Strategy will help 
Newark and Sherwood Council become a carbon neutral organisation by 2035, delivering the 
most efficient savings and driving a positive contribution to the environment, whilst working 
with stakeholders and businesses to positively influence change in the District.  
Newark and Sherwood District Council understands how important climate change is for our community.
In the 2018 Resident Survey, 90% of respondents said it was important or very important to be able to live in a sustainable w ay.
The Council has made significant progress in reducing its direct organisational emissions since first working with the Carbon Trust in 2011. The 
Council's declaration of a climate emergency in 2019 has brought renewed focus to this work.
The United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change has warned that we have 10 years to make the necessary changes to limit a rise in 
global temperatures to 1.5 °C. Failure to act will see a marked increase in sea levels and flooding, extreme and abrupt changes to weather patterns, crop
failures, extinctions of plant and animal species and global economic disruption and crisis [1]. The increased frequency and intensity of weather events that 
we have experienced locally highlight why this is such an important issue for Newark and Sherwood District Council to respond to. 
At the 2018 Global Climate Talks in Poland, the UK along with over 200 nations agreed that action on climate change, with a m uch greater role strongly 
implied for Local and Regional Authorities like Newark and Sherwood District Council, is necessary in assisting Governments t o achieve their carbon 
reduction ambitions. In June 2019 the UK Government set a national target of achieving net zero emissions of greenhouse gases by2050.
At Full Council in July 2019, Newark and Sherwood District Council declared a climate emergency. The following actions were recommended: 
•Audit existing environmental practice within the Council
•Establish data to determine the carbon footprint of Newark and Sherwood District Council
•Consider the Council’s contribution to the district carbon footprint more widely
•Engage with stakeholders
All of the above actions have been brought together in this Climate Emergency Strategy to provide a robust and measurable way for the Council to take 
action to reduce its operational carbon emissions, whilst driving change in the broader District. Climate Emergency Declaration
[1]Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Special Report –Global Warming of 1.5 °C, October 2018
Purpose of the Climate Emergency Strategy
Newark and Sherwood District Council provides a range of essential services across the 
District. This Climate Emergency Strategy sets out the framework and roadmap for reducing 
carbon emissions across the Council’s own operations in providing these services. The strategy 
will include: 
•The target that the Council is aiming to achieve
•A shortlist of the carbon reduction projects that will be undertaken to reach this target
•Additional actions the Council will take to reduce, eliminate or offset its own carbon 
emissions
•How progress will be monitored and reported on
•How the Council will continue to engage and support others; individuals, businesses and 
community organisations to drive broader action in the District.
This strategy will be reviewed annually to enable new issues, challenges, opportunities and 
solutions to be considered.
This strategy uses a baseline year of 2018/19 to set targets and measure emissions reduction 
from going forward. 2018/19 is the most recent available dataset, with the Council’s carbon 
emissions measured at 2,165 tCO2e and. District emissions of 987,800 tCO2e
During the  2018 -19 data collection period Newark and Sherwood Homes, a separate 
company, provided housing management services on behalf of the Council. From 1 February 
2020, housing has been reintegrated into the Council. Data collection and subsequent analysis 
recognises the differences at the time of collection but looks forward to full integration.
One tonne of CO2e (tCO2e) is the equivalent to the average emissions of one passenger on a 
return -flight from Paris to New York or driving 6000 km in a diesel car.The Greenhouse Gas Protocol 
The World Resources Institute Greenhouse Gas (GHG) protocol is the globally 
accepted carbon accounting standard. The Council will take into account both  
direct and indirect organisational emissions for its own operational estate:
•Direct GHG emissions are emissions from sources that are owned or controlled 
by the reporting entity.
•Indirect GHG emissions are emissions that are a consequence of the activities of 
the reporting entity, but occur at sources owned or controlled by another entity.
•The GHG Protocol further categorises these direct and indirect organisational 
emissions into three broad scope categories:
•Scope 1: All direct GHG emissions.
•Scope 2: Indirect GHG emissions from consumption of purchased electricity, 
heat or steam.
•Scope 3: Other indirect emissions, such as the extraction and production of 
purchased materials and fuels, transport -related activities in vehicles not owned 
or controlled by the reporting entity, electricity -related activities (e.g. 
Transmission & Distribution losses) not covered in Scope 2, outsourced 
activities, waste disposal, etc.
GHG Protocol –Scope 1, 2 and 3 emissions (source GHG Protocol )
Newark and Sherwood District Council Carbon Footprint
Image source: https://www.wm -saunders.co.uk/castle -house -shortlisted -for-major -award/NSDC emissions broken down by source FY 18/19
Newark and Sherwood District Council has set a target of becoming a carbon neutral 
organisation by 2035.
The target incorporates emissions sources that have good data availability, to allow for 
consistent and accurate monitoring and reporting, and are within the Council’s sphere of 
influence, allowing the Council to achieve reductions through actionable changes. This 
includes1:
•Energy consumption in the Council -operated buildings;
•Fuel consumption in the Council’s fleet;
•Disposal and treatment of waste generated by the Council (including water)
The Carbon Trust measured the Council’s footprint from these emission sources, and for the 
financial year 2018/19 was 2,165 tCO2e. It is the Council’s intention to reduce these emissions 
as much as feasibly possible by 2035, and offset any residual emissions with good quality 
offsets. Appendices A -C detail the methodology for calculating the footprint and the footprint 
breakdown.
To act as a comparator, the sources of carbon emissions from Newark and Sherwood District 
has been calculated using data from the UK’s Greenhouse Gas Inventory. The Inventory 
estimates the carbon dioxide emissions at local authority level across the UK. In 2018/19 the 
total carbon footprint of the District was 987,800 tCO2e, comprised of petroleum products 
(43%), gas (26%), electricity (16%), coal (8%) and manufactured fuels (7%).987,8002,165
0 200,000 400,000 600,000 800,000 1,000,000 1,200,000Total District EmissionsNSDC EmissionsComparison of Newark District Emissions to NSDC Emissions for the 
FY 18/19 (tCO2e)2,165
tCO2e
1Emission sources are often categorised by scopes, as defined by the World Resources Institute (WRI). The Council’s 
target is entirely inclusive of scope 1 and 2, and includes some elements of scope 3 (disposal and treatment of waste)30%
40%29%1%
Electricity
Fleet
Gas
Waste & WaterPriority project identification
In order to understand the emissions reductions that could be achievable by 2035, ‘hotspot’ areas 
have been identified. These are areas that offer the most potential for emissions reductions. The two 
key hotspot areas for Newark and Sherwood District Council are:
•Energy consumption in council -operated buildings
•Fuel consumption in the Council’s fleet
Through interviews with NSDC officers and independent analysis, the Carbon Trust has developed a 
shortlist of priority projects that could be feasibly implemented in these areas. Implementation cost, 
energy savings and carbon savings from these projects have been calculated, although more detailed 
feasibility studies will be required before any project is taken forward. The following slides detail some 
of these projects and the cumulative impact of how these projects will help the Council achieve carbon 
neutrality by 2035.
Although the focus has been on larger projects in the Council's hotspot areas, this is not a definite list 
of all that is possible. The Council will continue to seek out project opportunities that achieve 
emissions reductions alongside their primary benefits. Importantly, the Council will assess all projects 
for their emission reduction potential, to ensure that at least they won't have an adverse impact on 
the Council emissions.NSDC Climate Emergency Target
‘A carbon neutral organisation 
will measure its carbon 
footprint, and develop and 
implement a Carbon 
Management Plan (including a 
reduction target). Residual 
emissions will then be offset by 
high quality, certified carbon 
credits.’    
Carbon Trust definitionHotspot: Energy consumption from Council operated buildings
Newark and Sherwood District Council own a range of buildings across the District. 
Active4Today Ltd is the preferred operator of Newark and Sherwood District 
Council leisure centres and sports development, including Newark Sports and 
Fitness Centre, Dukeries Leisure Centre and Blidworth Leisure Centre.
The Carbon Trust identified the top 10 buildings by their carbon emissions in the 
Council’s 2018/19 carbon footprint (graph to the right) and considered a range of 
emission reduction opportunities that could be applied to achieve the Council’s 
2035 target.
Electricity and gas consumption are the dominant emissions sources for all 
buildings. Numerous measures can be put in place to reduce these emissions. 
As the national grid decarbonises it is recommended that heat sources are 
generally electrified where possible (through the installation of heat pumps). This 
will help reduce gas consumption significantly and the emissions associated with 
heating Council operated buildings.
0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900LeisureCouncil buildingsPotential emissions from Council operated buildings in 2035
Electricity [tCO2e] Gas [tCO2e]0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700
Newark Sports and Fitness Centre
Dukeries Leisure Centre
Castle House
Palace Theatre
Brunel Drive Depot
Newark Beacon
National Civil War Centre
Blidworth Leisure Centre
Lorry Park Lighting
Vicar Water Visitor Centre
Lincoln Road Sports Pavillion
Newark Lorry Drivers' Toilets and Service Area
Sconce and Devon Park Management Building
Car Park Lighting (London Road)
Bridge Lighting PillarElectricity and gas consumption across NSDC operated buildings (tCO2e)  
Electricity emissions [tCO2e] Gas emissions [tCO2e]
Hotspot: Energy consumption from Council operated buildings
Leisure Centres
Emission reduction project opportunities were identified at Newark Sports & 
Fitness Centre, Blidworth and Dukeries Leisure Centres. Measures included:
Electrification of Heating
•Installation of Ground Source Heat Pump at Newark, Air Source 
Heat Pump at Lincoln Road Sports Pavilion 
•Reduce reliance on gas
•kWh savings: 1.3 million kWh
•Lifetime CO2 savings: 3,100 tCO2e 
Lighting Upgrades
•Upgrade all old light fittings to new LED luminaires
•Fully upgrade all buildings in the short term
•kWh savings: 72,000
•Lifetime CO2 saving: 72 tCO2e
Solar PV
•Install solar PV arrays across all viable roof spaces
•Solar will offset increased electrical loads form electric 
heating
•kWh savings: 133,000 kWh
•Potential CO2 reduction: 195 tCO2eCouncil Buildings
Emission reduction project opportunities were identified across Castle House, 
Palace Theatre, National Civil War Centre, Vicar Water Visitor House, Newark 
Beacon, Lorry Park service area and Brunel Drive Depot. Measures included:
Electrification of Heating
•Installation of Air Source Heat Pumps at all sites
•Reduce reliance on gas
•kWh savings: 581,000 kWh
•Lifetime CO2 savings: 2,005 tCO2e
Lighting Upgrades
•Upgrade all old light fittings to new LED luminaires
•Fully upgrade all buildings in the short term
•kWh savings: 59,000 kWh
•Lifetime CO2 savings: 69 tCO2e
Solar PV
•Install solar PV arrays across all viable roof spaces
•Solar will offset increased electrical loads form electric heating
•kWh savings: 137,000 kWh
•Lifetime CO2 savings: 187 tCO2e
• Improvements to data monitoring. Implement a defined process for energy management and utility data collection moving forward. In order for the Council to ach ieve its 
Carbon Neutral target it is vital that the year -on-year energy consumption of all assets is recorded appropriately. A digital Au tomatic Monitoring and Targeting ( aM&T ) 
system should be employed, along with a dedicated job role to centrally manage this process.
Hotspot: Fuel consumption in the Council’s fleet
Emission Reduction project opportunities
Using telematics systems
•The Council has already introduced telematics systems across 
all vehicles that are capable of providing information. The 
Council should continue to use these systems to monitor the 
efficiency of the fleet driving and introduce training if 
improvements can be made.
Detailed review of EV transition and installation of EV charging 
infrastructure
•The Council is actively carrying out fleet and depot reviews to 
quantify carbon reduction and transitions to EVs across their 
fleet of vehicles. This will allow the Council make the most 
effective transition to a fully electric fleet.
*The fleet operated by Newark and Sherwood District Council during the baseline FY 18/19 consisted of 64 
vehicles. Updated information regarding the Council’s fleet of vehicles has been provided for the FY 19/20, 
covering 131 vehicles. Information relating to vehicles for the FY 19/20 has subsequently been used to 
quantify this opportunity. Fleet electrification
•Full electrification of Council fleet vehicles is the most 
effective way for the Council to decarbonise fleet vehicles and 
should be implemented where possible. Alternative fuels may 
be determined more suitable for some vehicles, but this will 
reduce the carbon reductions achieved.
•Annual carbon reduction of 554.37 tCO2*
714
77
26
12
16
5
4
30 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800
Refuse trucks or road sweepers (rigid size)
Diesel van Average (up to 3.5 tonnes)
Diesel HGV Rigid (>3.5 - 7.5 tonnes)
Diesel van Class I (up to 1.305 tonnes)
Gardening and Grounds Maintenance - diesel
Average diesel car
Industrial mobile machinery - gas oil
Medium diesel car, from 1.7 to 2.0 litreEmissions ( tCO2e)Total Emissions from Council owned fleet vehicles FY18/19 (tCO2e
0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900DieselElectricityModelled change in fleet emissions with full electrification by 2035
2018 2035Analysis shows that the identified projects could reduce the Council’s emissions by 1,613 tCO2e by 2035.
The pathway includes the expected decarbonisation of the national grid. (The carbon intensity of grid electricity is decreasi ng as the proportion of electricity generated from renewables 
increases and conventional fossil -fuel power generation is phased out.) From an emissions perspective this increases the attract iveness of electricity as a fuel source and is a significant 
contributor to the Council’s expected emissions reduction. Pathway to target 
Key points in the pathway include:
2020 / 2021 –LED rollout and Solar panel installation 
2022 to 2029 –Transition fleet to electric vehicles, waste
management improvements
2029 / 2030 –Heat pump installation
The two highest impact projects –fleet electrification and installation of a 
GSHP at Newark Sports and Fitness Centre –both involve the displacement 
of fossil fuel with electricity. Electrification will be critical for the Council to 
achieve their decarbonisation target. 
However, the electrification of the conventional technologies (e.g. vehicles, 
gas boilers) often requires supplementary measures and infrastructure, and 
should not be viewed as a like -for-like replacement. The Council will ensure 
it’s aware of the requirements associated with electrification and plan a 
strategy for its’ successful implementation across transport & heat. 05001,0001,5002,0002,500
Leisure and recreation Fleet Council buildings BAU Waste & WaterPathway to 2035 carbon neutral target
1613 
tCO2e
552 
tCO2eThe scenario shows that NSDC will have approximately 552 tCO2e of residual emissions in 2035. This is a significant reduction on the baseline but 
still represents a gap to the Council’s target. To close the gap further, the Council will:
Implement best practice across the estate
The scenario presented does not account for incremental progress in energy efficiency, building controls, and behavioural shi fts. NSDC will consider 
a review of building management systems (BMS), end -of-life procurement guidelines, and employee engagement to optimise the use o f assets 
under the Council’s control.  NSDC will ensure their climate emergency target is imbedded into broader Council policy and pro cesses, so that no 
other activity is inadvertently having a detrimental effect on reaching the target.
Additions to the estate
Additions and/or changes to the estate will be captured in the Council’s reporting. If the Council is involved in any new bui ld projects, the energy 
performance of the building will be a core component throughout the design, procurement, and construction phases of the proje ct.
Offsetting
Even under an extreme decarbonisation pathway, it is likely that NSDC will still have some residual emissions in 2035. It To address this the Council 
will consider the formation of a robust offsetting strategy with high quality credits, to match these residual emissions. The exact level of offsetting 
required by NSDC is still not clear and guidance is expected to progress between now and 2030. (The World Resource Institute and the Carbon Trust 
are developing a new accounting standard for GHG removal, which is due for public comment in 2021). Therefore at this stage, theCouncil commits 
to developing an offsetting strategy as the sector develops, including the principles of: 
a. Reductions before offsetting. Offsetting should only be explored after efforts to achieve reductions within an organisation’s emission 
boundary have been explored.
b. Additionality. The reductions achieved should be additional to what would have happened in the absence of the project.Gap to targetEmission sources in the Scope 3 footprint: 
•Council procured goods (e.g. paper) and services (e.g. construction contracts)
•The energy consumption in leased buildings owned by the Council but operated 
by a third party
•Companies that the Council holds an equity investment in 
•Employee commuting to work
•The extraction, production, and transportation of fuel and energy consumed by 
the Council
•Disposal and treatment of waste generated by the Council (including water)
•Emissions associated from business travelBusiness Travel
6%
Contracts
32%
Leased 
Buildings
47%Waste
1%Water
1%Commuting
13%Other carbon reduction opportunities
Newark and Sherwood District Council’s Indirect Emissions
The Carbon Trust has identified other emissions that occur within the Council’s value chain, but are 
outside of the Council’s direct control (called Scope 3). These emissions were a total of 866 tCO2 in 
2018/19. 
For many organisations the majority of their greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions lie outside their own 
operations in their Scope 3. 
Measuring Scope 3 emissions can allow organisations to: 
•Assess where the emission hotspots are in their supply chain;
•Engage suppliers and assist them to implement sustainability initiatives;
•Improve the energy efficiency of the products they use;
•Positively engage with employees to reduce emissions from business travel and 
commuting.
The indirect nature of Scope 3 emissions make primary data harder to obtain . Where actual data 
is not available, benchmarks and/or proxies are often used to approximate emissions. Additionally, 
as emission reductions are ultimately reliant on a third party, there are fewer direct actions that a 
reporting organisation can take to reduce their indirect emissions.
Due to the above factors, emissions have only been included in the Council’s target where the data 
is robust and therefore an emission reduction can be demonstrated (waste and water). For other 
emission sources in the Council’s Scope 3 actions have been identified to improve data collection 
and measurement. These actions will be included in the Emissions Reduction Action Plan.866 
tCO2eNewark and Sherwood District Council Scope 3 breakdownOther carbon reduction opportunities
Leased buildings
Leased buildings are buildings that are owned by Newark and Sherwood 
District Council, but leased to and operated by a third party. Therefore NSDC 
has less control over the emissions of these buildings.
The total emissions from leased buildings contribute 408 tCO2e to the 
Council’s carbon footprint. This calculation has been based on floor area, with 
a proxy applied for the type of building to calculate emissions. Actual data 
from leaseholders will give a much more accurate picture of the emissions 
associated with these buildings.
Data collection programme
It is recommended that Newark and Sherwood District Council work with their 
leaseholders to establish a data collection programme that will improve the 
understanding of consumption on these sites. Through a programme of 
engagement, they can then work with leaseholders to implement carbon 
reduction measures. Primary measures should be:
Building Fabric Upgrades LED Lighting Solar PV      
Electrification of Heat                    Encourage uptake of green tariffs
Contracts
The emissions associated with all contracts totals 598 tCO2e, accounting 
for 18% of total NSDC emissions.
For the 2018/19 carbon footprint, all figures were calculated based on 
the monetary value of the contract and an economic sector proxy.  
Data collection programme
It is recommended that Newark and Sherwood District Council work 
with their suppliers to establish a data collection programme that will 
improve the understanding of the emissions associated with the 
different contract activities. If suppliers are required to disclose their 
emissions to the Council, this will help propagate GHG emissions 
throughout the supply chain.
Collaboration with other Local Authorities and Agencies
Newark and Sherwood District Council will also work with other local 
authorities and agencies to identify policy areas where reductions may 
be possible. For example, with planning.
Other carbon reduction opportunities
Business travel and Commuting
Total business mileage and commuting emissions were estimated to be 
156.6 tCO2e, approximately 4% of the Council’s total footprint.
Opportunities to reduce the emissions associated with both these activities 
largely evolves around reducing the total journeys and mileage being 
completed by Council employees. The Covid -19 pandemic has started to 
change working patterns and reduce commuting, through increased 
remote working. Employee travel can be reduced through:Waste Management
The waste generated by the Council’s buildings was 499 tonnes in 2018/19, 
producing 10.6 tCO2e . Waste and water is included in the Council’s carbon 
neutral target as the data available for these emissions is good. Progress 
towards reducing emissions in waste and water will be tracked as part of 
the progress against this target.
Currently 76% of the Council’s waste by mass is incinerated. To reduce 
emissions as a result of waste disposal, a waste management protocol 
following the simple waste hierarchy of ‘Reduce, Reuse, Recycle’ should 
continue to be implemented and a new target set beyond the Council’s 
current strategy (2006 -2020). 
Indicative reductions from improved waste management
Current waste practice
Total waste to incineration –499 tonnes
Emissions produced –10.6 tCO2e
If a 20% reduction was applied to landfill waste
Total waste to incineration –399 tonnes (saving of 100 tonnes)
Emissions produced –8.5 tCO2e (saving of 2.1 tCO2e)
Remote 
working
Encouraging 
public 
transport
Video 
conferencingCar share 
incentives
Employee 
engagement•Newark and Sherwood Homes (N&SH) was brought back into Council control in early 2020 –the same time at which work on this strat egy and data collection was being 
undertaken. Whilst the emissions from Council owned housing were not included in the carbon neutral target, it is important t hatthese emissions are addressed as part of the 
decarbonisation of the District.
•The carbon emissions from the Council owned housing stock was a total of 17,130 tCO2e for 2018/19. This includes the emissions associated with gas and electricity consumption 
across 5467 properties, alongside emissions associated with 67 vehicles, previously owned by Newark and Sherwood Homes.
•81% of emissions from N&SH activities are associated with gas consumption across the housing stock. Over 5000 of the properties are currently connected to the gas grid .
•As the Council seeks to reduce the emissions associated with the housing stock, it will be vital that sources of heat are electrified through the use of technologies such as 
Ground/Air Source Heat Pumps, alongside other measures. The electrification of heat sources therefore plays a crucial role in the proposed decarbonisation strategy for housing. 
2,207
1,469
1,440
825
638
625
566
535
530
5200 500 1000 1500 2000 2500
xiii) Bungalow (Trad + Non-Trad) On Gas A-C
v) 1945-64 Large Terr House/Semi (>70m2) (Trad) On Gas A-C
x) Post-1945 Low Rise <3 Storey (Trad + Non-Trad) On Gas A-C
v) 1945-64 Large Terr House/Semi (>70m2) (Trad) On Gas D-G
xi) Medium Rise 3-5 Storey (Trad + Non-Trad) On Gas A-C
iii) All other Pre-1945 House (Trad) On Gas A-C
x) Post-1945 Low Rise <3 Storey (Trad + Non-Trad) On Gas D-G
viii) All House (Non-Trad) On Gas A-C
iii) All other Pre-1945 House (Trad) On Gas D-G
On Gas A-CTop 10 highest emitting Archetypes across Newark and Sherwood Homes 
Gas emissions (tCO2e) Electricity emissions (tCO2e)
Emissions from Council -owned housingPhasing of carbon reduction project opportunities*The Carbon Trust undertook analysis to show an 
indicative pathway of how emissions from the 
Council’s housing could be reduced if a range of 
decarbonisation measures were rolled out to 2040. 
Some dwellings are already fully powered by 
renewables. Other measures included the installation 
of Solar PV, installation of Heat Pumps, roll out of LED 
lighting and double glazing and insulation.
This indicative pathway shows how the current 
housing could improve its energy efficiency and 
heating.  A full feasibility study is required to assess 
the financial implications. Actions to decarbonise the 
housing stock will be included in the Emissions 
Reduction Action Plan. 02,0004,0006,0008,00010,00012,00014,00016,00018,000
2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033 2034 2035 2036 2037 2038 2039 2040Indicative pathway for decarbonisation of NSDC housing stock, showing emissions by 
asset type to 2040 [tCO2e]
Leisure and recreation Fleet Council buildings Newark and Sherwood Homes BAUR14
* Carbon reduction measures have been tailored to the current Archetypes present across N&SH. R1: Ambient Ground Loop Heat Pumps & EE measures
R2: Ambient Ground Loop Heat Pumps & EE measures 
R3: Individual ASHPs average size 5kW
R4: Individual ASHPs average size 6kWR5: Individual ASHPs 8kW
R6: Individual ASHPs average size 8kW
R7: Package of insulation and glazing measures
R8: Whole house deep retrofit to zero energy 
standard
R9:Package of insulation and glazing measuresR10: Shared ambient loop heat pumps
R11: Individual ASHPs 6kW and EE measures
R12: Individual ASHPs and EE measures
R13: Whole house retrofit, ASHP, Solar PV and 
Battery StorageR14: Shared ambient loop GSHP and EE 
measuresR1,R2,R3,R4R5,R6,R7,R8,R9
R10,R11,R12,R13
2025 Implementation Year 2030 Implementation Year 2035 Implementation Year 2040 Implementation Year
Emissions from Council -owned housingLinks to broader Council policies & strategies
Strategy How this links to the Climate Emergency Strategy Recommendations to enhance action in the District & 
ensuring alignment with this Strategy
Newark & 
Sherwood 
Community Plan 
2019 –2023The plan sets out what the Council intends to achieve over the 
next four years to improve residents’ quality of life and enable 
those who live, work and invest in Newark and Sherwood to 
prosper and fulfil their potential. Includes actions for accelerating 
the supply of new homes, improving transport infrastructure and 
enhancing the District’s natural environment.A carbon emissions assessment of the activities set out 
in the Community Plan would be helpful to understand 
whether the activities are contributing to an increase of 
carbon emissions in the District and drive low carbon 
options to be considered for infrastructure and housing 
construction. 
Asset 
Management 
Strategy 
2016 –2026The Asset Management Strategy highlights that the Council's 
assets must be continually maintained to meet wider community 
and environmental agendas. The plan aims to improve the 
energy efficiency of homes, this includes where possible the 
identification of opportunities to utilise renewable energy 
sources and associated technology to reduce carbon emissions. The Asset Management Strategy should be aligned with 
the emissions reductions required by the Council’s 
target, in particular for Newark and Sherwood Homes. 
More detailed work will be required to understand the 
most cost effective carbon reduction opportunities for 
N&SH housing stock.
Newark & 
Sherwood’s Local 
Development 
Framework 2019Sets the Local Development Framework for the District, including 
the Core Strategy DPD, Site Allocations DPD and Wind Energy 
SPD. Includes Core Policy 10 in relation to the District’s 
commitment to tackling climate change.In line with the LDF review timescales, ensure policies 
that drive the highest possible climate mitigation and 
resilience for development across the District. 
D2N2 Energy 
Strategy 
2019 –2030Sets a 2030 vision for the D2N2 LEP to be a national pioneer in 
clean growth and test -bed for work class energy systems 
innovation. The Council could work with the D2N2 LEP to identify 
local businesses that could drive clean growth and pilot 
local energy projects that would be well suited to the 
Newark and Sherwood District.The Climate Emergency links to a range of other policies, strategies and initiatives that the Council has already implemented . 
Some key links, and recommendations on how the strategies can be aligned are set out below: 
http://www.d2n2lep.org/write/D2N2_Energy_Strategy.pdf
Monitoring and Reporting
•All of the actions detailed in this Strategy have been included in an Emissions Reduction Action Plan , with an assigned timeline and ownership. This includes 
actions to meet the target, to progress the decarbonisation of Council owned housing and improvements required to data collec tion for indirect emissions.
•The Council’s Carbon Footprint will be updated on an annual basis. Progress against the Emissions Reduction Action Plan monit ored regularly and reported to 
the Policy and Finance Committee on an annual basis.
•In addition to monitoring progress towards the target, officers will continually monitor how local plans and policies can sup port the ability of the Council to 
reach their target.
Governance
•The Council’s Climate Emergency Working Group was established in July 2019 with elected member representatives (Chairs and Vice Chairs) from the Leisure 
& Environment, Homes & Communities, Economic Development, and Policy & Finance committees to oversee the production of this S trategy.
•The Council recognises the importance of having the correct oversight and organisational procedures in place to maintain a fo cuson carbon reduction over 
time and manage the implementation of this Strategy. In order to embed this Strategy in Council activities, instead of mainta ining the separate CEWG, going 
forward overall responsibility for the Climate Emergency Strategy and Emissions Reduction Action Plan will sit with the Polic y and Finance Committee, with 
reporting to other Committees as required. 
•Knowledge sharing and integration across internal council -led teams will be crucial to success , as will initiatives that can be driven forward by the residents, 
organisations and businesses across the borough. 
•To this end, the Council has created a new role of Environmental Policy and Project Officer to develop and implement environm ental working, with oversight 
from the Director of Communities. This new role will also seek to engage with stakeholders.  A project team of officers has b een created to support the 
creation of this strategy. The project team will be refocused to support the delivery of relevant actions. Governance, Monitoring and Reporting
Newark and Sherwood District Council recognises that effective engagement with a range of different stakeholders from across the
Council and District will be a key facilitator towards successful climate emergency strategy.
Engagement to date
Next steps
In line with the Newark and Sherwood Community Plan objectives, the Council will: 
Build on previous engagement undertaken across the Council, such as the “ Greener, Safer, Cleaner” and “ Greening Newark and 
Sherwood” agendas, to develop an initial list of stakeholders to continually engage with.
Complete internal in -depth stakeholder mapping exercise to identify, map and prioritise key stakeholders from across the Council . 
This will ensure that key stakeholder needs are identified and understood with the relevant resources being targeted effectiv ely. 
Develop the appropriate tools to accurately plan and track all stakeholder interaction and store stakeholder information.Engagement
Selected 
stakeholder 
conversations 
(Jan 2020)2019 Parish 
Council 
Conference 
(Nov 2019)Creation of 
project team, 
CEWG and 
green@work
(c. Nov 2019)Plan agreed 
to create 
Strategy 
(Sept 2019)Climate 
Emergency 
declared
(Jul 2019)Resident 
Survey 
(Dec 2018)• In order to calculate a carbon footprint there are two primary inputs, the ‘activity’ 
or volumetric data and the associated emission factor. Activity data is the 
quantification of the action of the emission source, whether that be kWh of 
electricity consumed or kilometres driven by a vehicle. The emission factor is the 
metric of kg of CO2e produced by one unit of the associated activity. Emission 
factors are provided for a range of activities by the department for business, 
energy and industrial strategy (BEIS); these factors are updated annually where 
required.
• Numerous other activities are more abstract and require a proxy to either 
transform the activity data in to a value that can be used with a BEIS emission 
factor, or a proxy emission factor to use with the available activity data. An 
example of the former would be using the floor area of a building as activity data, 
then benchmark data of electricity consumed per m2 as a proxy and finally 
combine this with the BEIS emission factors. Another example is to use contract 
values (£) as activity data and a proxy economic based emission factor (in this 
case EEIO)Appendix A –Calculating the carbon footprint
Environmentally Extended Input Output
•Environmentally Extended Input -Output (EEIO) factors use expenditure mapped to broad economic sectors to provide a proxy for car bon emissions. The methodology developed 
by the World Resources Institute and Carbon Trust, allows for the calculation of emissions produced for over 19,000 specific goods and/or services, which are linked to 430 broad 
economic sectors for which emission factors per pound (£) of expenditure are available.
•It should be noted that EEIO values provide emissions for sector specific goods/services within broad economic sectors but no t for the exact individual goods/services. This means 
that although being able to provide a broad, first iteration emission value; it is not exact –further analysis of the operation s of an individual goods/services are needed to 
determine a more precise footprint. EEIO factors should only be used where first hand activity data is unavailable / difficul t to obtain. These factors have therefore only been used 
for the councils procured goods and services . Figure X: Graphic detailing the general calculation methodology to arrive at 
carbon emissionsScope Included Elements Excluded elements
1
Organisation vehicles
2 Purchased electricity
3 Business Travel Capital goods
Waste & water 
generated/supplied and disposed 
of operationsUpstream transportation 
and distribution
Purchased goods and services Upstream leased assets
Employee Commuting Franchises (downstream)
Investments (downstream)Appendix B –Scope breakdown of NSDC carbon footprint
Greenhouse Gas Protocol emissions included in carbon neutral target NSDC emissions footprint for 2018/19
Source % of total Emissions [tCO2e]
Electricity 30.4% 658.8
Fleet 39.6% 856.7
Gas 29.0% 628.0
Waste 0.4% 10.7
Water 0.4% 10.2
Total 2164.5Appendix C –Scope breakdown of Newark and Sherwood District
050100150200
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018Emissions (ktCO2)Domestic
Emissions type Sum of Emissions (ktCO2)
Bioenergy & Wastes 0
Coal 78.2158
Electricity 160.747
Gas 257.9206
Manufactured Fuels 69.4656
Petroleum Products 421.4506
Grand Total 987.7996Bioenergy & 
Wastes
0%Coal
8%
Electricity
16%
Gas
26%Manufactured 
Fuels
7%Petroleum 
Products
43%Bioenergy & Wastes
Coal
Electricity
Gas
Manufactured Fuels
Petroleum Products
Change in District emissions from 2005 to 2018District emissions breakdown in 2018/19
This analysis calculates the sources of carbon 
emissions from residential and business across the 
Newark and Sherwood District, using data from 
the UK’s Greenhouse Gas Inventory. The 
Inventory estimates the carbon dioxide emissions 
at local authority level across the UK. 
In 2018/19 the total carbon footprint of the 
District was 987,800 tCO2e, comprised of 
petroleum products (43%), gas (26%), electricity 
(16%), coal (8%) and manufactured fuels (7%).Appendix D –Emissions Reduction Action Plan
Please see the accompanying document. Whilst reasonable steps have been taken to ensure that the information contained within this publication is correct, 
the authors, the Carbon Trust, its agents, contractors and sub -contractors give no warranty and make no 
representation as to its accuracy and accept no liability for any errors or omissions. All trademarks, service marks and 
logos in this publication, and copyright in it, are the property of the Carbon Trust (or its licensors). Nothing in this 
publication shall be construed as granting any licence or right to use or reproduce any of the trademarks, services 
marks, logos, copyright or any proprietary information in any way without the Carbon Trust’s prior written permission. 
The Carbon Trust enforces infringements of its intellectual property rights to the full extent permitted by law.
The Carbon Trust is a company limited by guarantee and registered in England and Wales under company number 
4190230 with its registered office at 4th Floor Dorset House, Stamford Street, London SE1 9NT.
Published in the UK: 2019.
© The Carbon Trust 2019. All rights reserved. 
