Our Newcastle 
Our Future 
Net Zero Newcastle - 2030 Action Plan 
Priority Actions Update 
September 2020 - March 2021 
TIMELINE: Page 31 2 3 4 5 
Priority Action not yet started. 
Priority Action initated and early works 
conducted. 
Reasonable progress to date on Priority 
Action. 
Priority Action progressing well towards 
completion. 
Priority Action complete. 1 
2 
3 
4 
5 NET ZERO PROGRESS BAR 
LEGEND 
TIMELINE: Page 2  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Net Zero Newcastle 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
  
 Foreword from the Leader 
In April 2019 Newcastle City Council (NCC) declared a Climate Emergency and made a bold commitment  
to achieving city-wide Net Zero status by 2030.   
We’re by no means alone; over 300 UK councils have taken the important step of declaring a Climate 
Emergency and establishing Net Zero commitments, as well as the UK Government enshrining a Net Zero 2050 target into law.  But while we are not alone in declaring a Net Zero transition, it is absolutely the case that there is no precedence or road map for the city-wide Net Zero transition.  So, in September 2020, Newcastle City Council produced and approved a bold and comprehensive ‘Net Zero Newcastle – 2030 Action Plan’ (referred to as the ‘Action Plan’).  The Action Plan is hosted on our new Net Zero web -
page: www.newcastle.gov.uk/netzero . 
The Action Plan sets out (among other important topics) the challenge facing the city, the vision for a Net  
Zero future, how we intend to engage with our 
residents, businesses and organisations, and very important-
ly establishes more than 100 Priority Actions that we can take over the coming years to set us off in the  
Net Zero transition.   These Priority Actions cover three key themes (namely Energy , Transport , and Adap -
tation and Sustainability) reflecting the three primary elements of our emissions inventory (namely energy,  
transport and waste) which accounts for 99% of our Scope 1 and 2 emissions (for further information,  
please see ‘Emissions Profile’ section below).   
Despite the devastating impacts of Covid-19 over the course of 2020, the city’s determination and  
cross-party commitment to achieving Net Zero status by 2030 
remains undiminished.  It is increasingly clear  
that the crisis that we are facing now must a pivotal moment in our transition to a low carbon future.  
The Climate Emergency is as real as it was before the pandemic and climate change remains the chal-lenge of our generation. It is clear from the scientific evidence that the impacts of climate change are stark  
and accelerating in severity.  These systemic climate shocks are expected to have similarly profound and  
wide-ranging impacts on the city infrastructure and environment, and its residents and businesses.  
I am very pleased that despite the enormous challenges of Covid-19, there has been no let-up in our over -
all city-wide commitment and drive towards Net Zero and in many cases, I have observed an acceleration  
of Net Zero activity across the Council and partner organisations.  In fact Newcastle was recognised as  
an international Climate Leader and is one of only four places in the UK to receive the top “A” grade from  
international climate research provider Carbon Disclosure Platform (CDP) and one of only 88 globally.   
City partners including the Newcastle upon Tyne Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Newcastle University,  
Northumbria University and Newcastle College Group have also made excellent progress with defining  
science-based targets, strategic action planning and deivering programmes of work for the Net Zero tran-sition.  I have also been delighted to see the rapidly growing commitment to the Net Zero agenda from a  
range of businesses, utility companies and community groups within the city and the region. 
I am pleased to present this report which gives an update on city-wide progress against the Priorit
y Actions 
listed in the 'Net Zero Newcastle - 2030 Action Plan' and demonstrates the enormous amount of progress 
that we have collectively made over the last six months towards our Net Zero goal. 
Cllr Nick Forbes 
Leader of Newcastle City Council and Co-Chair of the Newcastle Net Zero Taskforce 
PAGE 1 
Available for download at: 
www.newcastle.gov.uk/netzero 
'Net Zero Newcastle  
- 2030 Action Plan'
Emissions inventory by  
sector 
Newcastle awarded  
International Climate  
Leader status (CDP  
A-rating)Net Zero Newcastle 
Priority Actions Update 
For each of the Priority Actions listed in the 'Net Zero Newcastle - 2030 Action Plan', an update is  
provided below which includes the following information:  
Priority Action 
refe rence number
Priority Action Number 
Priority Action Description 
Priority Action 
description 
PROGRESS UPDATE 
- 
NEXT STEPS 
- 
1 2 3 4 5 Concise update on 
progress on the Priority 
Acti on over the course 
of 2020. 
Concise update  
on expected next steps  
for the Priority Action 
Net Zero p
rogress bar 
 
Progress description  
diag ram Net Zero Progress 
For each of the Priority Actions, a progress bar is provided.  To date, the following Priority Actions have been progressed to the greatest extent: •Priority Actions A16 and E18 - securing large sums of grant fund-ing thorugh the Public Sector Decarbonisation Scheme (PSDS) and  
the Green Homes Grant Local Authority Delivery scheme.
•Priority Action A21 - establishing a Citizen's Assembly at North ofTyne regional scale.
•Priority Action T8 - as part of the Healthy Pupil Capital Fund,schools are receiving resources and support to help educate theirpupils about air quality and take steps to improve the levels ofpollution around the school.
•Priority Action T11 - initiating an e-Scooter trial throughout thecity.
•Priority Action A&S5 - establishing a Cold Weather Plan whichincludes consideration of the impacts of climate change and cold
weather on public health, operational winter servicing and socialcare .
•Priority Action A&S9 - securing funding through the Urban TreeChallenge Fund and delivering tree planting.
•Priority Action A&S19 - submitting a c omprehensive response to  
the Government's Planning White Paper including detailed rep -
resentation on Net Zero issues. 
September 2020 - March 2021 
PA
GE 2 A1 
Develop list of carbon offset oppor -
tunities taking into account the key  
considerations set out in Key Consid-erations for Carbon Offsetting. 
PROGRESS UPDATE - Inital list of carbon offsett opportunities  
under development.   
- Negative Emissions Technologies study in  
progress with consultant.
NEXT STEPS 
- Compile list of potential carbon offsetting  
options.- Criticaly assess offsetting options to deter-mine if they meet Key Considerations for  
Carbon Offsetting.
 1 2 3 4 5 A2 Ensure that representatives on the  
Tyne and Wear Pensions Fund continue  
to lobby for further disinvestment in  
fossil fuels. 
PROGRESS UPDATE - Review underway by Newcastle City  
Council of options to lobby Tyne and Wear  
Pensions Fund for disinvestment in fossil fuel  
revenue businesses.
NEXT STEPS 
- Engage with Tyne and Wear Pensions Fund  
and seek changes to Investment Strategy to  
address Net Zero changes.
1 2 3 4 5 A3 Explore whether a city-scale carbon  
insetting programme would be suitable  
for Newcastle, and gauge interest from  
local organisations, businesses and resi-dents. 
PROGRESS UPDATE - Developing an initial list of potential  
carbon insetting projects and capital costrequiring funding.
 
NEXT STEPS - Monitoring pilot programmes for carbon  
insetting to determine their effectiveness  
and key considerations.- Develop framework for carbon insetting  
and initiate trial.
2 3 4 A4 Further develop Key Performance  
Indicators and Local Metrics of Perfor -
mance. 
PROGRESS UPDATE - Working with Newcastle University,  
developed a brief for local metrics of per -
formance, data analytics and associated Net  
Zero research programmes
NEXT STEPS 
- Secure funding to deliver brief and estab -
lish Key Performance Indicators for achieve -
ment of Net Zero in the city- Implement OpenData approach and es-tablish data platform and regular updates- Incorporate data into Carbon Disclosure  
Platform (CDP) 2021 submission and ongo -
ing disclosures to demonstrate performance  
against Net Zero 2030 target
1 3 4 5 2
A5 
Continue to engage with all members  
of the city through the Climate Change  
Convention.  Hold additional Climate  
Change Summits, including a Youth  
Summit. 
PROGRESS UPDATE 
- Regular meetings of the Climate Change  
Committee and the Net Zero Taskforce  
held during 2020.   
- North of Tyne Combined Authority  
(NTCA) Citizen's Assembly Steering Board  
established and first meeting held.  Resident  
recruitment underway.
- A Student Climate Change Summit was  
held in March 2021.
NEXT STEPS 
- Work with NTCA to implement Citizen's  
Assembly
- Hold 3 further Climate Change Summits  
in advance of COP-26 - Youth; Voluntary  
Sector and Community; and Business.   
1 2 3 4 5 A6 
Improve over time local emission moni-
toring (either directly or via indicators)  
to improve the accuracy of Newcastle's  
emissions inventory. 
 PROGRESS UPDATE 
- Initial engagement with organisations 
holding potential data sources for local 
emission monitoring underway.
NEXT STEPS 
- Determine appropriate sources, access  
and analytics of those datasets to determine  
local proxy data.
- Incorporate data into New
castle's emis-
sions inventory.  
1 2 4 5 1234 5A7 
Promote and encourage uptake of the  
Net Zero Pledge and associated local  
low carbon action by city residents and  
businesses. 
PROGRESS UPDATE 
- Net Zero Pledge made live - please sign  
up by visiting 'Pledge your support' link at
www.newcastle.gov.uk/netzero . 
NEXT STEPS 
- Further develop carbon calculator and  
incorporate Net Zero Pledge.
- Promote Net Zero Pledge and develop  
follow-on activities.
2 3 4 5 1 A8 
Prepare for and seek to implement as  
many Net Zero projects as possible by  
COP-26 in November 2021 to demon-
strate Newcastle's climate leadership.  
PROGRESS UPDATE 
- Various projects in progress including the  
City Decarbonisation Delivery Programme,  
the Heat Network Decarbonisation Fea-
sibility Programme, Electrification of Heat  
programme, etc.
NEXT STEPS 
 
 
 
 - Continue to develop, seek funding and
deliver Net Zero projects.
- Monitor Shared Prosperity Fund
developments and consider further
opportunities for working in partnership
with North of Tyne Combined Authority
through the Green New Deals, Low
Carbon Skills Fund-i ng and Economic
Recovery Funding.A9 
Continue to engage at local, regional,  
national and international forums to  
learn lessons, access funding and deliv -
er resources to key Net Zero actions. 
PROGRESS UPD ATE 
- Engagement at local, regional, national and  
international forums in progress and
learning lessons to be applied in
Newcastle.
NEXT STEPS  
-Continue engagement and prepare for
further activity in advance of COP-26.
 
n   September 2020 - March 2021 
PAGE 3 PAGE 4 TIMELINE: Page 5 1 3 4 5 2 A10 
Engage with local and reg ional busi-
nesses and business forums on Green  
Growth and how best to maximise the  
benefits to the city. 
PROGRESS UPDATE 
- First webinar (Green Homes Grant and  
Domestic Decarbonisation -Opportunities 
for Installers) held on 10 November 2020 -  
positive feedback from participants
NEXT STEPS
-Establish programme of webinars and  
business engagement prior to Business  
Climate Change Summit.
 - Work with InvestNewcastle, CBI, North
 East Chamber of Commerce  and others, 
to develop  understanding of  requirements 
 of local businesses to successfully deliver 
 their Green Growth ambitions.
- Determine opportunity of COP-26 to 
attra ct inward investment for local business   A11 
Engage in and promote new forums  
and routes for research, development,  
innovation and pilot programmes in the  
low carbon sector across the city. 
PROGRESS UPDATE 
- Engagement ongoing with universities   
regarding low carbon heat research 
including geothermal boreholes supplying  
heat to Helix District Energy Network
NEXT STEPS
- Continue to expand  links between  
NCC, universities and other research  
companies and organisations.
 - Facilitate and encourage links 
between
 research organisations and  businesses. - Establish Newcastle as a Low Carbon  
Research and Innovation Hub and focus 
on attracting low carbon businesses to 
the city.  
2 3 4 5 1 A12 
Work with city higher education pro -
viders and education partners to pre -
pare for, and support, a low carbon  
skills transition. 
PROGRESS UPDATE - Initial engagement undertaken with New -
castle College Group.
NEXT STEPS 
- Further engagement with higher and fur -
ther education providers required.- Assess options to access North of Tyne  
Combined Authority (NTCA) funding for  
Low Carbon Skills Funding and use to best  
effect.
3 4 5 2
A13 
Provide business support to SMEs in  
the city through a Green Growth deliv -
ery strand of the Business and IP Cen-
tre (BIPC) Newcastle. 
PROGRESS UPDATE 
- Framework under development for BIPC  
support to businesses to reduce their  
carbon footprint and to access support  
for identifying future low carbon revenue  
streams and business opportunities.
NEXT STEPS 
- Establish Net Zero Business Forum.
- Finalise framework for BIPC Net Zero  
business support and secure funding.
- Explore opportunities of working with  
North Star Ventures on new start-ups and
attracting inward investment for low carbo
businesses
3 1 2 4 5 A14 
Actively promote climate change ac -
tion, learning, research, idea generation  
and leadership through the Students in  
Newcastle Forum (SiNF). 
PROGRESS UPDATE 
- Links established and Climate Change /  
Net Zero is one of the three selected target  
areas for the Students in Newcastle Forum  
(SiNF).
- Student Climate Change Summit took  
place in March 2021 in partnership with the
SiNF.
NEXT STEPS 
- Climate Change Student Champions to be  
appointed
- Priority Actions by SiNF to be agreed and  
Climate Change Champions to progress and  
monitor delivery.
3 2 4 5 A15 
Each January, prepare an annual up -
date for the previous year, and a con-
cise forward plan for the next year of  
actions taken through the Net Zero  
Newcastle programme. 
PROGRESS UPDATE 
- First annual update produced for period  
September 2020 to March 2021.
NEXT STEPS 
- Continue providing annual updates each  
year.
1 2 3 4 5 A16 
Monitor, prepare for and submit grant  
and other funding applications to deliv -
er on the city's Net Zero commitment,  
with an immediate priority to stimulate  
economic growth and job retention and  
creation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 PROGRESS UPD ATE 
-Several funding applications progressed
over the course of 2021 including Net
Zero Innovation Fund, Green Homes Grant
Local Authority Delivery pr og
ramme, Public 
Sector Decarbonisation Scheme, European
Regional Development Fund, among
others.  Funding applications have related
to research programmes, domestic  low 
carbon retrofits, public sector building 
retrofits,
 low carbon heat network
expansion.
NEXT STEPS 
-Continue to monitor upcoming funds,
work to ensure local content in the delivery
of the funds and drive forward Net Zero
programme.
1 2 3 4 5 1 2 3 4 5 1 
11  234 5  1 5 
1 TIMELINE: Page 6 
A17 
Support city partners in making suc -
cessful applications for grant, research  
and other funding. 
PROGRESS UPDATE 
- Several funding applications have been  
supported to date around Net Zero related  
work programmes.
NEXT STEPS 
- Continue to support upcoming activities  
by city partners.
1 2 3 4 5 A18 Look beyond grant funding by working  
with public and private sector partners  
to develop pathways to commercial  
deployment and mass roll-out of low  
carbon measures. 
PROGRESS UPD ATE 
-Ongoing activity across multiple work -
streams.
NEXT STEPS 
- Ensure continued and enhanced  
attention on reducing unit costs of low
carbon measures by conventional and 
innovative means. 
1 2 3 4 5 A19 
Working with the Youth Democracy  
Group (formerly the Youth Council), a  
Climate Change Youth Summit will be  
arranged. 
PROGRESS UPDATE 
- Youth Climate Change Summit planned for  
2021, in advance of COP-26 in November  
2021.
NEXT STEPS 
- Hold Youth Climate Change Summit and  
establish Climate Change Champions
- Priority Actions by SiNF to be agreed and  
Climate Change Champions to progress and  
monitor delivery.
1 2 3 4 5 A20 
Explore opportunities to engage with  
school age children on Climate  
Change issues and solutions through 
the curriculum, by providing hands on  
Net Zero project ideas and supporting  
in their delivery. 
PROGRESS UPDATE 
- Youth Clima
te Change Summit planned  
for October 2021, in advance of COP-26 in  
November 2021.
NEXT STEPS 
- During the Youth Climate Change Summit,  
engage with schools and community groups  
for young people to determine suitable  
routes to encourage participation and ac -
tion on Net Z
ero projects.
1 2 3 4 5 E2 
Monitor developments in the nation-al and international energy sector to  
identify new and / or promising emerg-ing technologies and applications to  
deliver Net Zero. 
PROGRESS UPDATE 
- Engagement with Association of Public  
Sector Excellence (APSE) in relation to  
learning about future technologies and ap -
plications
- Review of new and promising emerging  
technologies to contribute to Net Zero  
transition in housing in progress.  
- First trial pr
oject in progress to test smart  
home technologies to social housing units.
NEXT STEPS 
- Review of non-domestic promosing low  
carbon energy technologies
1 2 3 4 5 E3 
Continue to work to eliminate fuel  
poverty through installation of energy  
efficiency measures and provide on-going advice and support to fuel poor  
residents. 
PROGRESS UPDATE 
- £1m Renewable Heat Incentive application 
made to install ground source heat pump  
system to 2 tower blocks (164 properties)
- £1.6m ECO funding bid submitted – install  
cavity loft insulation to 17 tower blocks  
(1,465 properties)
-NCC started trial of new low carbon  
technologies and insulation to deliver 
significant Fuel Poverty and energy  
reduction.
- Gas boiler upgrades and thermal 
improvements also underway across social  
housing stock.
NEXT STEPS- Progress low carbon technolog
 ies and
insulation products trial in social houses.
1 2 3 4 5 E4 Work with private sector partners and  
housing organisations to deploy avail-able Green Homes Grant and other  
funding streams to as many properties  
as possible within the city. 
PROGRESS UPDATE 
-  £4.68m Electrification of Heat installation  
of 250 heat pumps across the city
- £1.02m Green Homes Grant Local
Authority Delivery (GHG LAD) Phase 1a  
secured - installation of external wall
insulation/ heat pumps to 90 owner  
occupied properties.
- GHG LAD Phase 1b application
successful (c. £1.9m) for installation of  
external wall insulation/ heat pumps/solar  
PV to 175 owner occupied properties.
NEXT STEPS 
- Prepare for upcoming grant funding op -
portunities including Social Housing Decar-
bonisation Fund.
1 2 3 4 5 E5 Engage with the private rented sector  
to ensure adherence with the Minimum  
Energy Efficiency Standard (MEES) and  
support where possible implementa-tion of low carbon measures to deliver  
EPC improvements. September 2020-March 2021 
PROGRESS UPDATE 
- Prepared response to the Government  
Consultation on 'Improving the Energy  
Performance of Privately Rented Homes in  
England and Wales' which addresses mini-
mum standards, delivery timeframes
, moni-
toring and enforcement, etc.
NEXT STEPS 
- Continue to support national Minimum  
Energy Efficiency Standard (MEES) that is  
ambitious and delivers on the Net Zero  
2030 agenda.
- Assess and engage on Future Homes  
Standard and what it will mean for private  
rented sector properties in the city.
2 3 4 5 1 
A21 
A Net Zero Champions approach to  
communicating key messages will be  
considered by the Citizen's Assembly. 
PROGRESS UPDATE 
- NCC representative appointed to Over -
sight Panel for Citizens' Assembly.
- First meetings of Citizen's Assembly held  
and full programme expected to be com-
pleted in 2021.
 
 NEXT STEPS 
-Engage with the North of Tyne Combined
Authority (NTCA) to ensure that
Newcastle's Climate Change Champions
are engaged fully in delivery of the city-
wide Net Zero programme
1 2 3 4 5 A22 
Work with trade unions, city-wide  
businesses and employers and business  
forums to support the transition to a  
low carbon / green economy in the city. 
PROGRESS UPDATE 
- Engagement undertaken to date through  
the Net Zero Taskforce.  
- Economic Development team at
Newcastle City Council reviewing  
opportunities for upskilling and retraining  
for future growth economies in the city.  
NEXT STEPS 
- Ensure greater focus on this topic at up -
coming Net Zero Taskforce meetings.
- Create fr
amework for engaging all parts  
of the green economy in the city to enable  
key sector skills, supply chain and emerging  
businesses to be supported over the coming  
years.
1 2 3 4 5 A23 
Use the tools at our disposal to pro -
mote our key 'Asks of Government'  
(see orange box to the right) either  
directly to decision makers, through  
consultations, or via collective advoca-cy groups. 
Various policy positions communicat
ed to  
Government to influence the successful  
delivery of the city-wide Net Zero pro -
gramme. 
1 2 3 4 5 E1 
Work with Northern Powergrid and  
Northern Gas Networks to assess and  
identify the best route to deliver Net  
Zero in the energy sector. 
PROGRESS UPDATE 
- Extensive engagement has been carried  
out over the c
ourse of 2020 with Northern  
Powergrid and Northern Gas Networks  
in relation to Local Area Energy Planning,  
Future Energy Sc
enarios, and city-wide for -
ward investment programmes to facilitate  
Net Zero project delivery.
NEXT STEPS 
- Conduct Local Area Energy Plan for area  
of city supplied by a single substation over  
course of 2021 and assess options for
scaling up to city-wide view.
-
Continue to monitor the progress made  
on decarbonising grid gas and electricity
-Conduct a review of grid capacity issues  
from the Electrification of Heat programme.
2 3 4 5 1 E6 
Develop Newcastle GREEN (GIS-
based Renewable Energy and Energy  
efficiency Network) website and pro -
mote uptake of low carbon measures  
to all property owners (domestic and  
non-domestic). 
PROGRESS UPDATE 
- Newcastle GREEN project initiated - solar  
PV map in preparation (example her
e).
- Working with Newcastle University to de -
velop underlying evidence base for tailored  
property recommendations.
NEXT STEPS 
 
 -  Explore group purchasing options for city
residents (example here)
- Launch Newcastle GREEN including
procurement / installation streamlined 
support service from NCC
1 2 3 4 5 E7 
Through the planning process, require  
and encourage developers to design  
and build properties that are fit for the  
future and conform fully with Policy  
CS16 (Climate Change). 
PROGRESS UPDATE 
-  Series of engagement events held by NCC  
and Gateshead Council in relation to
reviews of the Core Strategy and Urban  
Core Plan on Net Zero topics.
- Improved oversight and rigourousness  
checks of Sustainability Statements in pro -
gress.
NEXT STEPS 
 
 - Establish Development Manager training
and internal up-skilling of NCC staff in
relation to Sustainable Construction and
Moder n Methods of Construction.
- Review and update Core Strategy and
Urban Core Plan.E8 
Continue to support local SMEs with  
access to energy audits and energy  
grants through the Business Energy  
Savings Team (BEST) project. 
PROGRESS UPDATE 
 
 
 
 -  To date, 170 energy audits have been
carried out across the project, with 44
audits within the city of Newcastle Upon
Tyne. 7 Newcastle businesses have
received grant awards to carry out energy
efficiency im-p rovements with a combined 
annual carbon saving of 110 tonnes.
- Deliver ing audits up to Dec 2021. Project  
extens ion approved  to June 2022 requested  
from MHCLG.
NEXT STEPS 
- Working with partners to explore options  
for an extension to the BEST programme  
(BEST-2) to build on progress made.
1 2 3 4 5 E9 
Seek to expand the existing provision  
to local SMEs to have access to energy  
audits and energy grants through ex -
pansion of the BEST project. 
PROGRESS UPDATE 
- Feasibility of expanding the existing pro -
vision and how that would be structured is  
currently under
way.
NEXT STEPS 
- Considering options for further energy  
saving business support with North of Tyne  
Combined Author
ity and the North East  
Local Enterprise Partnership (NE LEP).
PAGE 5 PAGE 6 TIMELINE: Page 7 1 2 3 4 5 5 4 3 2 1 
TIMELINE: Page 9 
PAGE 8 
E10 
Promote through all suitable means,  
small scale renewable energy genera-tion and self consumption in domestic  
and non-domestic properties. 
PROGRESS UPDATE - Currently installing a 65kWp solar PV  
array at Cragside Primary School.  
- The Green Homes Grant Local Authority  
Delivery Phase 1a and 1b projects includes   
solar photovoltaic (PV)  
- The Public Sector Decarbonisation  
Scheme (PSDS) applications and the Net  
Zero Schools projects include solar PV
installations across the board
- City partners including the universities  
and the hospital trust have continued to  
develop their plans for solar PV installations  
on their campuses.
NEXT STEPS 
-Build internal expertise and assess
replacement programmes.September 2020 - March 2021 
PAGE 7  
 
1 2 3 4 5 
 
TIMELINE: Page 8  
 
 
  
E11 
Apply for funding for a pilot project for  
a Neighbourhood Virtual Power Plant. 
PROGRESS UPD ATE 
-Initial feasibility work and project defi-
nition underway and considering funding  
oppor tunities f or a Neighbour hood Virtual  
Power Plant demonstration project.
NEXT STEPS 
-Progress demonstration project and
determine plans for scaling up the
approach if demonstration project is
successful and financeable.
2 3 4 5 1 E12 
Continue to develop world-leading  
programmes of research and invest -
ment into enhanced renewable energy  
generation and storage and improving  
efficiency of generation through our  
universities. 
PROGRESS UPDATE 
- Newcastle University have engaged in a  
research programme for supplying the Helix  
District Energy Centre with renewable en-
ergy from the 1.6km geothermal borehole  
on site.
- Both Newcastle and Northumbria
Universities have various research  
programmes underway on smart cities,  
energy storage and power system
management and enabling renewable
energy expansion.
NEXT STEPS 
- Develop further opportunities for collaboration between universities and the 
Council and businesses.
1 2 3 4 5 E13 
Encourage uptake of renewable energy  
by preparing a Planning Process Note  
which sets out when installations are  
likely to benefit from Permitted 
Development and when they will need to 
secure the necessary planning approvals. 
PROGRESS UPDATE 
- Planning Process Note in preparation.
NEXT STEPS 
-Publish Planning Process Note in 2021, in  
advance of COP-26.
1 2 3 4 5 
E14 
Working with our delivery partner  
E.ON, deliver the BEIS funded
Electrification of Heat Demonstration  
Project and learn lessons that can be  
applied in future heat pump roll out
projects.
PROGRESS UPD ATE 
-Good progress made on project over the
course of 2020.  The latest figures at 14th  
Dec 2020 were 1,611 referrals received,  
568 surveys conducted, 213 systems
designed, 11 installations completed.
NEXT STEPS 
- Continue to deliver project against project  
plan and success criteria.
- Prepare a lessons learned document at the  
end of the assignment to facilitate future  
policy / deployment of electrification of  
heat.
1 2 3 4 5 E15 
Develop a delivery plan for wide-scale  
deployment of heat pumps to homes  
addressing key barriers such as supply  
chain issues, training of heat pump 
engineers, cost reductions,  
understanding of the t  echnology, etc. 
PROGRESS UPDATE 
-Initial engagement in relation to planning  
barriers for heat pump wide-scale 
deployme nt underway.
- Analytics programme for identifying 
suitable properties for heat pumps is  
underway through the City  
Decarbonisation Delivery Programme.
- Undertake commercial review of heat  
pump deployment across corporate estate  
and factor into asset management plans.
NEXT STEPS 
-Part of our delivery partner's (E.ON)  
brief  under the Electrification of Heat  
programme is to produce a learnings
document.
2 3 4 5 1 E16 
Monitor closely developments in the  
hydrogen sector and the potential for  
hydrogen to play an increasing role in  
our Net Zero heat / gas supply future.  
PROGRESS UPD ATE 
-Working with Northern Gas Networks,  
the universities and others, Newcastle City  
Council is monitoring the developing
hydrogen sector including the  
demonstration project of hydrogen in a 
residential development in Gateshead.
NEXT STEPS 
-Continue to monitor developments in the  
sector and determine if hydrogen will play a  
key role in our Net Zero heat / gas supply  
future.
- Considering factoring hydrogen into the  
Core Strategy as a new local planning
policy.
2 E17 
Work with Engie throu gh the Regenerate 
Newcastle Partnership to deliver District  
Energy Network and associated projects 
within the city, creating an expanded  
and increasingly integrated low carbon  
heat system. 
PROGRESS UPDATE 
- Feasibility studies are in progress on  
several low carbon heat network schemes  
through the Regenerate Newcastle 
Partnership.
- Secured funding through the Public
Sector Decarbonisation Scheme for  
extension of the Helix Heat Network to  
Blandford House / Discovery Museum.
-  Overarching city wide heat network
strategy  under development.
NEXT STEPS 
- Progress low carbon heat networks to  
Heat Network Investment Programme or  
alternative funding to secure pipeline of  
upcoming projects.
1 2 3 4 5 1 3 4 5 E18 Prepare for and deliver an ambitious  
programme of Public Sector Decarbon-isation of anchor institutions property  
portfolios via the forthc
oming funding  
mechanism. 
PROGRESS UPD ATE 
-Secured funds through the Public Sector  
Decarbonisation  Programme  for 
decarbonisation projects worth £27.5m for 
32 major sites including 16 schools within   
the city. The projects would remove 4,050  
tonnes of carbon dioxide emissions each
year.
NEXT STEPS 
- Submit Net Zero schools grant funding
applications to any future schools.
Consider options to align Schools Capital
Programme to Net Zero programmes.  
-  Prepare for future rounds of grant funding  
through the Public Sector Decarbonisation
Programme and other available funds.
2 3 4 5 1 E19 
Ensure that all new buildings and  
major capital programmes embed low 
carbon and renewable heat and  
electricity measures into their design 
and con struction. 
PROGRESS UPDATE 
- A voluntary Low Carbon Construction  
Standard is under development with city  
partners as the basis for new buildings and  
major capital programmes taking into
account embedded carbon and lifecycle
carbo n, including for new planning 
submissions.  
- North of Tyne Combined Authority  
(NTCA) Net Zero Innovation Fund project  
successful - the project involves determining 
decision making structures in capital   
programmes to enable Net Zero decisions.
NEXT STEPS 
- Finalise and publish voluntary Low Carbon 
 Construction Standard and secure pledgesfrom public and private sector to adopt it.
2 3 4 5 1 E20 Explore options for increasingly smart  
energy systems which adopt 'time of  
use' and 'flexible demand' approaches  
to energy consumption. 
PROGRESS UPDATE 
-  Feasibility works underway considering the  
use of Thermonics and V-charge heat
storage to act as flexible demand and  
energy storage devices.  At present, this is  
based on the use of Economy 7 tariffs.
-Part of the Neighbourhood Virtual Power  
Plant demonstration project entails using  
'time of use' tariffs to extract maximum  
value from the low carbon technologies.
-Completed a study on markets and
opportunities relating to batteries and  
reve nue stacking
NEXT STEPS 
- Progress with demonstration projects and  look at options for scaling up deployment.
1 2 3 4 5 E21 
In preparing the updated Local Plan,  
key low carbon and national or 
international standards will be  
considered and assessed for suitability 
to be incorporated into citywide 
planning policies. 
PROGRESS UPDATE 
- Various planning policy developments  
have occurred over recent months including  
consultation on the Planning White Paper,  
consultation on amendments to the Building  
Regulations Part L / Future Homes Standard  
and other Building Regulations changes to  
facilitate the Net Zero transition.
NEXT STEPS 
- Consider opportunities under new
planning guidelines for Planning Authority  
to implement Sustainability Guidance and  
establish a higher standard for low carbon  
measures through planning policy.
- Capture ambitious low carbon
considerations into updates to the Local  
Plan / Core Strategy.
1 2 3 4 5 
E22 
Use the tools at our disposal to 
promote our key 'Asks of Government'  
(see orange box to the right) either  
directly to decision makers, through  
consultations, or via collective 
advocacy groups. 
Various policy positions communicated to  
Government to influence the successful  
delivery of the city-wide Net Zero 
programme. 
1 2 3 4 5 T1 
Develop detailed plans for a citywide Low  
Carbon Transpor t Vision including 15  
Minute City concept, Lo w Traffic  
Neighbourhoods and incorporating the  
Local Cycling and  Walking Infrastructure 
Plan and School Streets initiative. 
PROGRESS UPDATE 
- Low Traffic Neighbourhoods (LTN) -  
forthcoming plans under development for  
new L
TNs and School Streets
- Local Cycling and Walking Infrastructure  
Plan (LCWIP) - drafted and awaiting
internal approvals.  
The Department for
Transpo rt (DfT) have encouraged   
authorities to produce plans but no  
dedicated funds have  yet been announced.
- A sustainable transport corridor was  
included in the Transforming Cities Fund  
which is allocated regionally.
NEXT STEPS 
- Secure funds and start implementation of  
addition LTN and LCWIP actions.
1 2 3 4 5 T2 
Assess options and develop a plan for  
limiting growth in the number of 
private motorised vehicles in the city, to  
counter the impacts of population  
growth. 
PROGRESS UPDATE 
- A key aim of the Low Traffic
Neighbourhoods is to reduce ownership  
and use of private motorised vehicles in
the city.
-  Emission based discounts for permit  
parkin g are under review, taking into  
account potential discount on parking
permit for low emission and ultra-low
emission vehicles.
NEXT STEPS 
-Citizen's Assembly and citywide Climate  
Change Summits to consider opportunities 
for embedding long t erm behaviour change. 
1 2 3 4 5 T3 
Systematically develop and implement  
plans to remove private motorized 
vehicles from the city centre, commercial  
districts and sensitive part of the city. 
PROGRESS UPDATE 
- Road space reallocation programme  has 
been progressed and encouraging greater
use of active travel in the city.
- City Centre Transformation Programme  
(CCTP) at advanced stage of development  
and incorporates low carbon transport  
elements and reducing impact of private  
motorised transport in the city centre.
NEXT STEPS 
-C
ontinue to prioritise active travel and low carbon transpot measures in relation to  citywide commercial districts and sensitive 
parts of the city.
1 2 3 4 5 T4 
Implement the Clean Air Zone 
(category C) using secured funds. 
PROGRESS UPD ATE 
-Revising business case for the Clean Air  
Zone to account for Covid-19 impacts prior  
to resubmission.
NEXT STEPS 
-Resubmit business case to the
Government's Joint Air Quality Unit
(JAQU)
1 2 3 4 5 
PAGE 9 T5 
Develop and implement an emissions  
based parking tariff in the city centre  
and key commercial districts. 
PROGRESS UPDATE - Review in progress of parking tariffs in  
the city centre and across the city, including  
consideration of emissions based parking  
charges.
NEXT STEPS 
- Finalise and implement parking tariff plans. 
1 2 3 4 5 T6 
Assess the potential for wider 
deployment of car clubs within the city,  
based on Ultra Low Emission Vehicles.  
Ensure that access to travel options is  
enhanced in communities with low car  
ownership through community clubs as  
opposed to household ownership. 
PROGRESS UPDATE 
 -Looking to change or renew car clubs
scheme contract in 2022 and will consider
expansion options.
NEXT STEPS  
-Continue ambition to expand - soft
market testing may be required to
determine best deployment method.
1 2 3 4 5 T7 
Develop and implement additional  
School Streets initiatives. 
PROGRESS UPDATE -Low Traffic Neighbourhoods (LTN) -  
forthcoming plans under development for  
new LTNs and School Streets
NEXT STEPS 
- Evaluate impact of School Streets trials- Seek further funding for School Streets  
initiatives if successful- Continue to press for implementation of  
moving traffic enforcement powers
1 2 3 4 5 
September 2020 - March 2021 
PAGE 10 TIMELINE: Page 11 T8 
Implement, and where po ssible 
enhance, the Healthy Pupil Capital  
Fund programme. 
PROGRESS UPDATE 
- 16 schools will receive resources and
support to help educate their pupils about  
air quality and take steps to improve the  
levels  of pollution around the school.  10  
schools will receive an air quality monitor,  
11 will  receive a cycle store, 11 will get a  
scooter  store, 14 will get cycle helmets to  
store at  the school.
-All applicants will also receive support  
from Newcastle City Council's active school  
travel programme – Mode Shift Stars – and  
bike ability training.
NEXT STEPS - Implement full programme
1 2 3 4 5 T9 
Develop and implement schemes to  
reduce the dominance of cars in the city  
by reallocating road space to active 
travel and low carbon transport modes,  
whilst meeting vibrant high street and  
Covid-19 requirements. 
PROGRESS UPDATE 
-Change in design and road space
allocation completed to multiple main  
streets within city across three priority  
areas: 1) city centre; 2) district centres  
and main transport corridors; and 3) low  
traffic neighbourhoods.
NEXT STEPS 
- Complete consultations and make
necessary scheme adjustments.  Where 
appropriate, make changes permanent.
 -Target road space reallocation in selected
areas.
 - Continue design and delivery of schemes
to reallocate road space through the
Transforming Cities Fund.
1 2 3 4 5 T10 
Implement a safe walking and cycling  
network to connect every school, to  
every park, to every district shopping  
centre, by implementing the key 
components of our Local Cycling and 
Walking Infrastructure Plan. 
Please refer to comments in Priority Action  
T1 in respect of LTNs and the LCWIP . 
1 2 3 4 5 T11 
Work with Gateshead Council to 
implement a 12 month e-Scooter trial.   
If successful, explore ways to extend  
and expand the scheme. 
PROGRESS UPD ATE 
-Procurement process for e-Scooter trial  
completed and appointed Neuron to
deliver scheme. Launched the Newcastle  
trial in February 2021.
NEXT STEPS 
- Implement and monitor 1 year long trial.
- Consider options for expanded e-Scooter  
scheme if trial is successful.
TIMELINE: Page 10 1 2 3 4 5 T12 
Prepare a bold, detailed and high 
quality submission to the Government  
for the recently announced Zero  
Carbon City Centre scheme.  
PROGRESS UPDATE 
- Early stage analysis conducted -
discussions around air quality, junction  
design considerations, street  
realignment, public transport
accessibility, etc, are in progress.
- Engagement with City Centre  
Transformation Programme (CCTP) in  
progress for updated public realm
incorporating low carbon transport
considerations.
 NEXT STEPS 
- Develop Zero Carbon City Centre
scheme and prepare funding
application.
1 2 3 4 5 T13 
Work with Nexus and other city public  
transport operators to develop a 
citywide plan for further improving 
trans-p ort integration and to develop  
and implement a Smart Ticketing system  
using the 'Pop' branded smartcard. 
PROGRESS UPD ATE 
-Continuing work as part of the North  
East Smar t Ticketing Initiative to improve  
smart ticketing options.
NEXT STEPS 
- Identify potential funding streams 
regionally to enable improved ticketing 
and integration.T14 
Consider options for expansion of, and  
new sites for, Park & Ride schemes  
across the city. Develop and seek  
funding for Sustainable Park & Ride  
schemes. 
PROGRESS UPDATE - Four Park and Ride sites are included  
in the Development and Allocations Plan  
(DAP)
NEXT STEPS 
- Nexus to look at Park and Ride at a  
wider geography as most sites likely 
outside New  castle
-Initial options analysis for solar PV car  
port, Electric Vehicle (EV) charging and  
small battery installations in public  
sector car parks under way.
2 T15 
Enhance the information and  
payment systems available for 
passenger transport to enable a  
'Mobility as a Service' approach to 
transport integration. 
PROGRESS UPDATE 
- After initial discussions, it is considered  
that this Priority Action will be best dealt  
with as part of the Reg ional Transport Plan.
- The e-Scooter trial mentioned in Priority
Action T11 is linked to delivery of this  
increasing Mobility as a Service offer by the  
city.
NEXT STEPS 
-Engage with the Regional Transport Plan  
development team and influence 
incorporation of regional improvements
in the Mobility as a Service and Integrated  
Transport approach.
2 
T16 
Work with bus operators to improve  
bus lanes and bus priority through 
better coordinated traffic signals on  
key transport corridors to improve  
overall public transport networks. 
PROGRESS UPDATE 
- The Transforming Cites Fund has funded  
the ITS scheme for upgrading junctions and  
enforcing key bus corridors and bus lanes  
along key r
outes
- In line with the National Bus Strategy,  
work has begun regionally on a potential  
Bus Service Improvement Plan- A review of the John Dobson Street ruling   
is underway to ensure learning and scheme  
improvements in future initiatives.   
NEXT STEPS - Deliver existing schemes and seek funding  
for additional forthcoming schemes.
2 3 4 5 T17 Assess options and the pros and cons  
of a bus franchising approach. 
PROGRESS UPDATE 
- Direct power for bus franchising are not  
available to Newcastle without referral to  
Department for Transport (DfT)
- Publication of the National Bus Strategy  
sets out requirements to franchise or
deliver Enhanced Partnerships.
NEXT STEPS 
-Engage with regional stakeholders to
determine pros and cons of a bus  
franchising and Enhanced Partnership
approaches.
1 2 3 4 5 T18 
Promote and support the transition  
towards ultra-low emission buses, taxis  
and freight vehicles operating within  
the city, including options such as 
cargo bikes. 
PROGRESS UPDATE 
- Z-move (the zero emissions delivery
service) has expanded.
-  2 new rapid chargers for taxis are  
planned for installation.
- Any Clean Air Zone would be
accompanied by grants to upgrade to
lower emiss-s ion vehicles (such as HGVs,  
LGVs, buses, private hire vehicles and 
Hackney carriages).  
- Go North East have secured dedicated
Electric Buses on the 'Voltra' 53/54
between Newcastle and Gateshead
NEXT STEPS
- Consider options for freight consolidation - Continue to make funding applications and  
implement plans.
2 3 4 5 T19 
If successful in grant funding bid to  
Office for Low Emissions Vehicles, 
implement a pilot scheme to provide  
23 Electric Vehicle chargers in a  
number of areas of the city. 
PROGRESS UPDATE 
- Funding of £150k secured through
Office for Low Emissions Vehicles for 23  
EV chargers.
-
Regional electric vehicle charging
infrastructure procurement exercise in  
progress with intention of proceeding  
with first installations in 2021.
NEXT STEPS 
- Complete regional EV procurement and  
installations.
-Seek Section 106 and Community
Infra
structure Levy (CIL) contributions  
towards future city-wide EV infrastructure
plans.
1 2 3 4 5 1 3 4 5 1 4 
1 1 2 3 4 5 
1 3 5 TIMELINE: Page 12 
T20 
Work with the North East Combined  
Authority (NECA) to renew, replace and  
expand the Electric Vehicle charging 
infrastructure across the city.   
Please refer to comments in Priority Action  
T19 in respect of Electric Vehicle charging  
infrastructure roll-out. 
1 2 3 4 5 
PAGE 11 T21 
Develop an ambitious city-wide plan  
for the  rollout of Electric Vehicle  
infrastructure across the city.    Work  
with North East Combined Authority  
to deploy Rapid Chargers, particularly  
to encourage use by electr
ic taxis. 
PROGRESS UPDATE - Demand study (looking at locations to put  
chargers for maximum uptake) in progress.- Considering options for integration of  
Electric Vehicle infrastructure into car  
parks. 
NEXT STEPS 
- Develop strategic document and tie into  
regional procurement (common 
infrastructure programme).
- Increase focus on home charging
expansion.
- Engagement with the Distribution
Network Operator (Northern Powergrid)  
to prepare network for Electric Vehicle
charging infrastructure roll-out and  
increased demand.
1 2 3 4 5 T22 
Work with the North East Freight  
Partnership and other relevant 
organisations to move freight away  
from road transport and to encourage  
the switch to zero emission vehicles. 
PROGRESS UPDATE 
- No progress to date.
NEXT STEPS 
- Table at upcoming North East Freight  
Partnership meeting.
2 3 4 5 T23 
Develop a plan for the city to 
mimplement Freight Consolidation  
lHubs and ow carbon last mile freight  
deliveries, and assess practical  
implementation options, as well as 
seeking funding. 
PROGRESS UPDATE 
- Freight management is dealt with under  
the Core Strategy for new development  
and takes into consideration servic
e delivery  
plans within the urban core (Policy UC8) -  
a validation checklist for new developments  
is in preparation.
NEXT STEPS 
- Create working group to consider strate -
gic plans for Freight Consolidation Hubs and  
low carbon last mile freight deliveries in the  
city.
T24 
Support other city low carbon transport 
projects such as the Metro rolling stock  
replacement programme, and work with  
city and regional partners to increase  
ambition in their transition to Net Zero.  
 
PROGRESS UPDATE 
 
- The Net Zero Taskforce offers a platform
for collaboration between city stakeholders.  
-Nexus is building a total of 42 new Metro  
trains, which will be delivered up to 2024. 
-  Through recent Joint Transport 
Committee bids, Newcastle City Council 
has been working with regional partners
to develop greater ambition for Net Zero
transition.
 NEXT STEPS 
-Identify priority projects and actions that
can be taken regionally to drive the
transition to Net Zero transport quicker.
1 2 3 4 5 T25 
Ultra Low Emission Buses scheme.   
Work with bus fleet operators to assess  
the necessary funding and to 
implement the infrastructure  
throughout the city to take 100% of  
buses to ultra low emission status. 
PROGRESS UPD ATE 
-Go North East have secured dedicated  
Electric Buses on the 'Voltra' 53/54
between Newcastle and Gateshead.
NEXT STEPS 
-Begin e ngagement with b us fleet o perators  
and understand scale of the challenge and  
work with new funding schemes such as the  
Zero Emission Bus Regional Areas (ZEBRA).
1 2 3 4 5 T26 
Investigate options for hydrogen to  
play a future role in public transport in  
Newcastle. 
PROGRESS UPD ATE 
-Initial discussions in progress with city  
partners for hydrogen to play a role in  
transport and for energy supply to
buildings.
NEXT STEPS 
- Progr ess discussions with city stakeholders  
to determine options for hydrogen to play a  
role in public transport in the city.
1 T27 
Wherever suitable and appropriate,  
support the decarbonisation of Out  
of Boundary Transport Emissions by  
working with local, regional and 
national transport organisations. 
PROGRESS UPD ATE 
-Funding secured to allow the reopening  
of the Northumberland Line to passenger  
trains, delivering a programme of activity  
which will see the re-introduction of direct  
passenger trains between south-east 
Northumberland and the centre of
Newcastle.
NEXT STEPS 
- Continue engagement with other local,  
regional and national transport  
organisations to agree key priorities and 
determine where the city of Newcastle can
provide support.
2 3 4 5 T28 
Use the tools at our disposal to 
promote our key 'Asks of Government'  
(see orange box to the right) either  
directly to decision makers, through  
consultations, or via collective 
advocacy groups. 
Various policy positions communicated  
to Government to influence the 
successful delivery of the citywide Net 
Zero programme.  
1 2 3 4 5 A&S1 
Produce a guidance document for  
property owners that sets out a 
summary of the key planning policies  
that enable sustainable development  
and a simple guide to streamlining an 
applica-t ion for low carbon initiatives. 
PROGRESS UPDATE 
- Planning Process Note to capture these  
elements in preparation in 2021.
NEXT STEPS 
-Publish Planning Process Note in 2021, in  
advance of COP-26.
1 2 3 4 5 A&S2 Produce a Green and Sustainable Pro - curement guidance document for our city's businesses. 
PROGRESS UPDATE - No progress to date
NEXT STEPS 
- Guidanc e documen
t to be prepared in  
2021, in advance of COP-26.
1 2 3 4 5 A&S3 Produce a template and guidance docu-ment for preparing a Sustainable Travel  
Plan, tailored to specific audiences /  
users.   
PROGRESS UPDATE - No progress to da
te
NEXT STEPS - Template and guidance document to be  
prepared in 2021, in advance of COP-26.
1 2 3 4 5 
A&S4 
Develop a Climate Chang e Adaptation  
Working Group including city 
organisations to identify key climate  
change risks and develop targeted and 
effective preparation, development and  
adaptation activities. September 2020 - March 2021 
PAGE 12 TIMELINE: Page 13 
PROGRESS UPDATE 
- Climate Change Adaptation Working  
Group established and 3 meetings held.   
Next meeting to be held in April 2021.- Group purpose established and agreed by  
working group participants.  
NEXT STEPS 
- Consider options of working with Core  
Cities and regional organisations to assess  
the cost of climate change impacts on the  
city / region and determine capital
programme of works required to adapt to  
climate change impacts.
- Forward adaptation work programme to  
be determined by working group partici-
pants.
1 2 3 4 5 A&S5 
Prepare a C old Weather Plan for 
Newcastle to address the city's response  
to protect residents and infrastructure  
from increasing severity and frequency 
of extreme weather events due to  
climate change. 
PROGRESS UPDATE 
- Cold Weather Plan draft completed and  
currently under internal review including  
consider
ation of public health, operational  
winter servicing and social care.  
NEXT STEPS - Finalise and implement Cold Weather  
Plan.  Periodically review.
1 2 3 4 5 A&S6 
Work with citywide partners and  
stakeholders to develop a plan for 
enhancing flood defences along the 
Quayside to replace the temporary  
barriers that have been used as a defence 
mechan ism to date.   
PROGRESS UPDATE 
- Quayside Barrier project under initial  
development with the Environment Agency  
and citywide stakeholders.
- Bid made to the Flood and Coastal
Resilience Innovation Programme for
deployment of an ambitious programme
of Sus
tainable Urban Drainage Systems  
(SUDS) across the city.  Awaiting
response.
NEXT STEPS 
- Progress Quayside Barrier project to 
funding and seek additional flood defencefunding. 
1 2 3 4 5 A&S7 
Ensure that Newcastle has sufficient  
provision of open spaces and green  
infrastructure going forward.  An  
Open Spaces and Green Infrastructure 
Strategy will be prepared.  
PROGRESS UPDATE 
- Series of engagement events (including  
one on Green Space and Infrastructure)  
held by NCC and Gateshead Council in  
relation to reviews of the Core Strategy and  
Urban C
ore Plan.
- Commissioned consultants to prepare  
the Open Space and Green Infrastructure  
Strategy.- Naturvation project extended looking at  
relationship between people, green space,  
public health and social capital.
 NEXT STEPS 
-Progress first stages of the Open Space
and Green Infrastructure Strategy with
target completion in advance of COP-26.
1 2 3 4 5 1 1 2 3 4 5 
2 3 4 5 1 TIMELINE: Page 14 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
  A&S8 
Submit a high quality bid to the Trees  
for Climate Programme to deliver a  
proposed North East Community Forest 
(NECF).  If successful, start woodla nd 
and tree creation at the earliest  
opportunity. 
PROGRESS UPDATE 
- Expression of Interest (EoI) for NECF  
prepared and practicailities of establishing  
a new Forest Team for a period of 4 years  
(2021 - 2025) assessed.   
- Full partnership working with all involved  
local authorities, combined authorities and  
national partners in progress
NEXT STEPS 
-Intention is to lodge the EoI to England  
Community Forests by February 2021 and  
to start planting trees by 2021 planting 
season (in advance of COP-26).
1 2 3 4 5 
PAGE 13 A&S9 
If successful in the Ur ban Tree Challenge 
Fund, start woodland and tree creation  
at the earliest opportunity. 
PROGRESS UPDATE - 2019 Urban Tree Challenge Fund grant  
application successful.- Planted 100 standard size trees and  
300 whips in last planting season (winter  
2019/2020) across various NCC controlled  
sites
NEXT STEPS 
-Deliver 3 year maintenance period for
existing planted trees to ensure longevity  
and carbon sequestration is achieved.
1 2 3 4 5 A&S10 
Implement low carbon measures and  
efficient resource management actions  
set out in the Waste Strategy Action  
Plan. 
PROGRESS UPDATE 
-  All new vehicles meet the latest emissions 
requirements and include electric bin lifts, improving  
their environmental sustainability and reducing noise. 
-Improved productivity and delivered operational 
efficiencies through route optimisation and  
maximising the benefit from two more local tip-off  
points in the recycling contract. This has also reduced  
our carbon footprint.
-Litter bin sensors are now installed in all citywide  
litterbins. We monitor fill levels and empty bins  
maximising the use of resources and reducing the  
carbon footprint of vehicles making unnecessary  
journeys
NEXT STEPS 
- Sourced a wholly electric Refuse Collection Vehicle  
to trial in the City Centre. While there were some  
operational issues, initial feedback was positive.  
The supply of these vehicles remains limited and the   
cost high but we continue to review their use.  
1 2 3 4 5 A&S11 
Working with businesses and NE1  
on experimental schemes to improve  
waste collection and recycling in the  
city centre, minimising its 
environmental impact. 
PROGRESS UPDATE 
-  High Bridge initiative in progress involving  
consolidated shared waste collection for  
businesses in the business district.
Newcastle City Council provide shared bin  
with agreed capacity (a reduced number  
and improved levels of recycling) with a 
volunatry agreement by businesses to  
manage the capacity themselves.
-Improvements to waste management in  
the city centre planned through the City  
Centre Transformation Programme (CCTP)
NEXT STEPS 
- Underground bin collection feasibility 
options to be considered.
1 2 3 4 5 
A&S12 
Continue working to deliver the Energy 
Recovery Facility to treat ‘residual waste’  
that should ensure over 90% of waste is  
diverted from landfill, delivering improved 
sustainability and reduced carbon  
emissions.  
PROGRESS UPDATE 
- Newcastle, Durham and the five Tees Valley Authorities signed an Inter Authority
Agreement that formally established the Tees Valley Energy Recovery Facility (TVERF) project, and launched an OJEU procurement process. The project focus is on ‘residual waste’ - this is what is left after ‘reduce, reuse and recycle’ has taken place.
- Following evaluation during October, in
November three bidders, FCC, SUEZ and Viridor, were invited to participate in dialogue,  
the next stage of the procurement process. NEXT STEPS
- Selection of the preferred bidder is expected 
in 2022.  Bidders are being asked for plans on 
the use of heat from the facility and heat 
networks, how they will reduce carbon
emissions, for example using Carbon Capture. 
1 2 3 4 5 A&S13  
Develop plans to improve efficiency of  
resource management through waste  
(including food waste), water, materials  
and other resources, particularly where  
a circular economy can be achieved. 
PROGRESS UPDATE 
- Plastic Free Status in the Ouseburn
established.
-  The use of recycled plastic as aggregate in  
roads is underway in the city.
- Newcastle City Council is working with  
catering departments in schools to ensure  
food waste collection.
-  Project Bind established, supporting local  
groups to improve food distribution and  
reduce food waste across the city.
NEXT STEPS 
 -Reinvigorate Resource Newcastle 
Partnership and work with Food
Newcastle Partnership.
-Look at new products and means of
boosting the circular economy.
1 2 3 4 5 A&S14 
Communicate personal sustainable  
actions to city residents to encourage  
significant uptake. 
PROGRESS UPD ATE  
 
September 2020 - March 2021 
PAGE 14 TIMELINE: Page 15  - Net Zero Pledge now available for sign ups here.
-During the pandemic, communications moved online using social media. Posts have focused on disposing waste appropriately at home, including  safe battery disposal, not overfilling wheeled bins, recycling pizza boxes,  issues caused by food left in  packaging and providing advice on services and
changes at the HWRCs.
- We have implemented individual ‘opt-in’ recycling schemes in areas of the City where  recycling bins are particularly contaminated, and 
associated communications about what and how
to recycle.
-What and how to recycle information went to
 households with bin collection calendar in March
2020.
 NEXT STEPS 
- We are working with the trade body for glass
manufacturers, British Glass, on a campaign to
increase the quality and quantity of glass recycled.
1 2 3 4 5 A&S15 
Work with project partners to develop  
an investment strategy which better  
protects Newcastle city centre from  
surface water flooding, taking into 
account climate change projections. 
PROGRESS UPDATE 
- Early stages of city centre flood plan  
in progress with engineering consultants  
appointed to undertake detailed
model  ing. Prioritised project list  
including both residential and  
non-residential areas under    consideration.
-Tyne Estuary project in progress looking at  
establishing wider Blue-Green city intercon-
nections.
NEXT STEPS 
- Complete city centre flood plan and seek  
Environment Agency funding (through busi-ness case submissions) to implement neces-sary defence schemes..
1 2 3 4 5 A&S16 
Meet Newcastle’s target to better 
protect 578 households, including 358 
currently at significant risk and 250 in  
the 20% most deprived areas, from  
surface water flooding by March 2026. 
PROGRESS UPDATE 
- This Priority Action relates to the  
capital programme for the next 6
years with the Environment Agency as
referenced in Priority Action A&S15.  
  - Sustainable Urban Drainage Systems
(SUDS) proposed for incorporation into
the City Centre Transformation Programme 
(CCTP) design.
NEXT STEPS 
- Report back to Regional Flood and
Coast Committee on progress against
strategic flood defence schemes.
1 2 3 4 5 A&S17 
When the Council divests of land and 
property, encourage sustainable  development options on the sites, such  as sustainable construction methods 
and materials, low carbon heat and 
electricity sources, etc. 
PROGRESS UPDATE
- No progress to date
NEXT STEPS
- Establish a Modern Methods of
Construction and Sustainable  
Construction guidance document /  
reference material for use by all public   
and private sector organisations.  
- Assess options for creating an expert
panel and working group for Sustainable
Construction and Modern Methods of
 Construction in Newcastle.
- Set minimum standard for sustainability to  be achieved on divesting land and property, 
to be contractually fixed during divestment 
process.
1 2 3 4 5A&S18 
Continue developing new plans to adapt  
to climate change effects including hot 
weather plans and surface water flooding 
plans.  Ensure best climate change  
practice is captured, including green-  
blue linkages. 
PROGRESS UPDATE 
- Key climate hazards and vulnerabilities  
have been identified through the Carbon  
Disclosure Project (CDP) and are being  
addressed by citywide practitioners and
delivery partners.
NEXT STEPS 
- Through the Climate Change
Adaptation Working Group, establish
task and finish groups for preparing
the city (its residents and
infrastructure) for the impacts of
climate change.
1 2 3 4 5 A&S19 
Prepare comprehensive response to 
the Planning White Paper with  
citywide position on incorporating 
green infrastructure and active travel 
infrastructure into new developments. 
PROGRESS UPDATE  
- Comprehensive response to Planning
White Paper produced including  
detailed representation on Net Zero
issues, focusing on delivering new  
developments that are low carbon and  
energy efficient, and promoting green
and sustainable infrastructure across  
the city. Currently working with  
Government on the pilot programme  
and may consider being a pilot
authority for new National Design
Codes.
NEXT STEPS 
- Continue to work with government
through pilot programmes and
promote Net Zero requirements.
1 2 3 4 5 
A&S20 
Use the tools at our disposal to promote  
our key 'Asks of Government' (see orange  
box to the right) either directly to decision  
makers, through consultations, or via 
collective advocacy groups. 
Various policy positions communicated to  Government to influence the successful 
delivery of the city-wide Net Zero 
programme. 
1 2 3 4 5 