Governance  
The Strategy is owned by the cross -party member working group, with the Action 
Plan owned by the officers working group. Progress is reported to Corporate 
Management team via officers and to Executive via the members working  group.  
group.The North Somerset Climate Emergency Strategy is a live document which outlines our seven  key principles  for how we will 
address the causes and conse quences of climate change , with the aim to be carbon neutral by 2030 . The S trategy is supported 
by the  acco mpanying Climate Emergency Strategic Action Plan  and Data Dashboard . The Strategy is owned by the cross -party 
member Climate Emergency working group and will link in with the developing  North Somerset Corporate Plan  2020 -2025, our 
Medium Term Financial Plan , and other strategic plans including the Economic Plan and the Joint Local Transport  Plan . The 
Climate Emergency Strategy and Action  Plan will be reviewed annually to confirm our principles  and to analyse  our progress .  
Key principles  Our scope  
How we will measure progress  The how  
 Areas we can influence or ask for help  and 
support  nationally  Areas we can influence  or ask for help 
and support locally  Areas we can influence through 
policy  activity  Areas we can influence through 
our contracts or through 
funding /support  Areas we directly control  North Somerset Council’s matrix of influence  
North Somerset Council only has direct control over a small proportion of the total carbon emissions of 
the area. Analysis  is ongoing to confirm this proportion but it is believed to be less than 2%. Reducing 
these emissions will form  our work  around becoming a net zero carbon council .  
For our other key principles , the council will take a leaders hip role. Part of this role will be  considering 
our matri x of influence to  identify actions that we can help to enable, support and influence both 
locally and nationally .  
The council will also seek to understand how our work will reduce differently scoped emissions in North 
Somerset. These include scope one : all direct emissions from activities within our area , scope two: all 
indirect emissions from energy production/ use in our area , and scope three : all other indirect emissions 
from activities within our area, occurring from sources we do not own or control . 
Stakeholders  
 
•The Climate Emergency Action Plan is aligned to the s even  key principles  of this strategy , with mult iple
actions for each principle all aligned to our level of influence and the scope each action will have on
emissions (scope one, two or three).
•For each action we ask: what will success look like ? These success measures form the basis of the
Climate Emergency Data Dashboard. The Data Dashboard measure s our progress  on a quarterly basis .
Examples  
Key principle  Scope  Actions  Success measures  Method  
Become a net zero 
carbon council  Scope one 
and two  100% council 
electricity supplied 
by renewables  •0% electricity from
non-renewable
sourcesReduction  
Replenish our 
carbon stores  Scope 
one, two, 
three  Identify 
opportunities for 
nature recovery 
networks  •Plant x trees by 2025
•Reduce amenity
grass by x% by 2025Storage  Also included in the Data Dashboard is an overview of North Somerset’s carbon emissions, both by 
tonnage and per capita. As we progress against our Action Plan we will measure the  progress 
towards our aim of becoming a carbon neutral council and a carbon n eutral area by 2030.  -2.04.06.08.0
-500.01,000.01,500.0
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017
ktCo2 per capitaktCo2Carbon emissions in North Somerset
ktCo2 per capita ktCo21 oC Damaging climate impacts are already being felt today at 1o of warming  
1.5 oC Keeping below 1.5o would help to protect ecosystems limiting impacts on 
vulnerable groups  
2 oC Below 2 o will limit the most damaging effects of climate change  
3 oC We are currently on track for 3o of warming – the tipping point  
4 oC Unchecked emissions growth could lead to severe and w idespread climate 
change by 2100  
Become a net zero carbon council  
An energy efficient built environment  
Renewable energy generation  
Repair, reuse, reduce and recycle  
Replenish our carbon stores  
Reduce emissions from transport  
Adapting to climate change  
Avoidance  
Reduction  
Mitigation  
Storage  Context  
Full councilExecutiveCross -party 
working group
Corporate 
Management 
TeamOfficers working 
groupNorth Somerset will aim to be a carbon neutral council and a carbon neutral area by 2030
key principle our influence the scope
Our stakeholders are 
aligned to our matrix 
of influence, some we 
can directly influence 
through contracts , 
funding  or support, 
others we can guide 
through policy  
change , and others 
we will need to 
challenge.  North 
Somerset 
CouncilResidents
Contractors
Businesses
Voluntary and 
community 
groups
Town and 
Parish councilsEducation 
providersNHS/ Public 
HealthPartner 
councilsCentral govtFor each key principle within 
this strategy , actions have 
been identified in our Action 
Plan  that will help to either 
avoid carbon production (low 
carbon homes), reduce the 
amount (renewable 
electricity), mitigate against 
production (public transport) 
or help to store it away (tree 
planting) . 