Carbon Management Plan 2019-2022 
1 
 
 
 
 
Carbon Management Plan 2019-22 
Our plan to address, adapt and act 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Author Lynda Stevenson Contact 
details  Stevensonly@northlan.gov.uk 
Owner James McKinstry Mckinstryj@northlan.gov.uk 
 
Date 1 April 2019 Version number 3 Document status Final Version 
 
Governance Committee  Environment and 
Transportation Date approved   
Review date 1 May 2019 
 
Strategic Alignment  
The Carbon Management Plan supports a number of cou ncil’s priorites 
The Plan for North Lanarkshire: 
Improve economic opportunities and outcomes  
Support all children and young people to realise th eir full potential 
Improve the health and wellbeing of our communities  
Enhance participation, capacity, and empowerment ac ross our communities 
Improve North Lanarkshire’s resource base  
 Carbon Management Plan 2019-2022 
2  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Change record 
 
 
 
 
  Consultation 
process  Key stakeholders, including members of the Carbon M anagement Group, were 
contacted at various stages of development for inpu t and feedback on select 
and entire text. 
Stakeholders Contacts identified for each service  
James McKinstry  
John Sanders 
Nicole Paterson 
Andrew McPherson 
Linda Johnston 
Lucinda Hughes 
Vicky Abernethy 
Graham Johnstone 
Fiona Maguire 
Catrional Bell 
John Ashcroft 
Cameron Barr 
Carol Ann Peerless 
Alex Miller 
David Carroll 
 Asset and Procurement Solutions  
Asset and Procurement Solutions 
Environmental Assets 
Regulatory Services and Waste Solutions 
Business Solutions 
Business Solutions 
Integrated Street and Community Services 
Environmental Assets 
Regulatory Services and Waste Solutions 
Regulatory Services and Waste Solutions 
Integrated Street and Community Services 
Housing Property and Projects 
Housing Property and Projects 
Planning and Regeneration 
CultureNL 
 
Distribution Carbon Management Group, Senior Management Team 
Date 00/00/00 Author  n/a 
Change made none 
 Carbon Management Plan 2019-2022 
3 Contents 
 
Foreword  4 
Introduction  5 
Section 1 – Strategic Context and Drivers  6 
Section 2 – Targets  10  
Section 3 – Projects and Activities  15  
Section 4 – Action Plan & The Plan for North Lanark shire  20  
Section 5 – Housing & Energy Efficiency  24  
Section 6 – Green Risk Register  28  
Glossary  0 
North Lanarkshire Ambition Statements  2 
 
  Carbon Management Plan 2019-2022 
4 Foreword  
 
Since our last carbon management plan, the council has achieved significant reductions in 
key emission areas.  Meanwhile the climate change a nd energy agenda in Scotland has 
gained momentum and has witnessed an increase in po licy development and activity for 
both domestic and non-domestic buildings. 
 
Reducing carbon emissions continues to be a key pri ority for the council. The Carbon 
Management Plan is an integral part of the Environm ent Strategy which brings together 
separate but related strategies, policies and plans  to ensure a one council approach to the 
environment.  
 
We ASPIRE that North Lanarkshire is the place to Li ve, Learn, Work, Invest and Visit and 
a key aspect of this will be to ensure that we have  an environment that allows us to deliver 
on this ambition. 
 
As a council we realise the important role we play including the example we set to our 
communities. This carbon management plan sets out h ow we aim to achieve further 
carbon reductions over the next three years, whilst  adapting to a changing climate and 
looking to sustain the environment around us. 
 
Please support our plan and help play your part in caring for our future generations.  
 
Robert Steenson 
Executive Director (Enterprise & Communities)  
 
 
 
In 2018, I became the Carbon Management Champion fo r the council and as such fully 
support the contents of this plan. I welcome the co ntinued commitment from the officers of 
the council to in their endeavours to positively im pact on our environment by targeting 
savings of main emissions sources. 
 
As the policy agenda continues to evolve, I look fo rward to the innovative ways that the 
council will look to meet its carbon commitments.  Furthermore, I look forward to the 
completion of the council’s Local Heat and Energy E fficiency Strategy pilot which whilst 
supporting the council’s carbon ambitions will look  at opportunities to decarbonise heat. 
 
Councillor Lynne Anderson 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Carbon Management Plan 2019-2022 
5  
Introduction 
 
North Lanarkshire Council, along with other large p ublic bodies such as Scotland’s 
universities and the NHS, plays an important role i n achieving the national carbon 
reduction targets. This carbon management plan focu ses on council projects and activities 
that will be delivered during 2019-2022.  
 
The success of this plan relies on the co-operation  and engagement of senior managers, 
employees and elected members.  Everyone within the  organisation has a responsibility to 
reduce carbon emissions in their daily work activit ies and service delivery. This 
organisational commitment is reinforced by the targ ets set within this plan which strive to 
continuously reduce the council’s emissions by focu ssing on the main emission sources. 
 
Our residents have an important role to play and ca n contribute to our carbon 
management approach and the national/international agenda by reducing the amount of 
waste that goes to landfill by recycling more. They  can also benefit financially from being 
more energy efficient as this will result in reduce d energy bills for their homes. The 
proposed EESSH 2 will further enhance domestic ener gy efficiency whilst addressing the 
emerging issue of air quality within homes. The cou ncil’s capacity to develop heat 
opportunities will be further strengthened through the pilot Local Heat and Energy 
Efficiency Strategy project. 
 
This carbon management plan initially looks at the strategic context and drivers, providing 
a summary of the legislation and policies which hel p support public bodies such as North 
Lanarkshire Council in their activities to reduce g reenhouse gas emissions.  It also 
provides an overview of the council’s governance ar rangements i.e. the Improvement and 
Accountability Framework. 
 
In Section 2, defining the organisation boundaries sets the parameters for calculating the 
council’s footprint.  The historical targets provid e a summarised timeline of the council’s 
carbon reduction journey resulting in its current f ootprint. Using the current footprint as the 
new baseline has informed the revision of the 2019 target. 
 
Section 3 reviews the progress from the 2015/16 bas eline in terms of both historic and 
current projects.  Through the council’s planned pr ojects and activities further energy 
efficiencies will be generated enabling a further c arbon reduction target. 
 
Section 4 draws on the complimentary actions of oth er council strategies, plans and 
policies that will contribute directly or indirectl y to the revised carbon reduction target and 
addressing/adapting to climate change. 
 
Section 5 focuses on the domestic sector as this co ntributes to the overall emissions of the 
North Lanarkshire area. 
 
Section 6 provides a high level summary of the curr ent carbon management risk register. 
 
  Carbon Management Plan 2019-2022 
6 Section 1 – Strategic Context and Drivers 
 
The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) was held at 
the Rio ‘Earth Summit’ in 1992, and since then ther e has been an international and 
national drive, via legislation and policy, to stab ilise the levels of greenhouse gases within 
our atmosphere. The Kyoto Agreement (2005-2012) was  the first international agreement 
where there was recognition of the need, and the co mmitment, to reduce carbon dioxide 
and other greenhouse gas emissions. Within Europe, further review of policy and 
legislation aims to directly combat the causes of c limate change. The 2030  
Climate and Energy Framework follows on from the Cl imate and Energy Package and 
increased its main targets as follows: 
 
• Reduce greenhouse emissions by (at least) 40% 1; 
• To meet (at least) 27% of EU energy needs with Ren ewables; 
• Reduce energy consumption by (at least) 27% by 203 0 2. 
 
In 2015 the UNFCCC ‘Paris Agreement’ detailed its a im to reduce emissions as quickly as 
possible and to aspire to halt global warming, and prevent a rise in temperature of a further 
2oC. The agreement came into force on 4 November 2016 . 
 
Figure 1: Related Legislation and Policy Summary 
 
 
 
                                                           
1 Compared with 1990 
2 Compared to 2007 scenario 
Carbon Management Plan 2019-2022 
7 ‘A Clean Planet for All’ is an ambitious strategy l inked to the Paris Agreement and sets out 
a vision for a prosperous, modern, competitive and climate neutral Europe. However, prior 
to the COP24 held in Poland, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) 
issued a special report where they stated it was likely  that global warming would reach 
1.5 oC by 2030-2052, highlighting the potential impact a nd risks throughout the world. At 
COP24 all the countries agreed to implement most of  the Paris Agreement, reaching a 
consensus on the monitoring and reporting of perfor mance.  Further discussion will take 
place in Chile in 2019 to finalise the remaining de tail.  By 2020 however countries will need 
to show that they have met their own targets and de veloped new ones for 2030. 
 
The Carbon Reduction Commitment Energy Efficiency S cheme (CRC) was enabled via 
Part 3 of the Climate Change Act 2008.  It was an i ncentive to reduce the amount of 
energy consumed in non-domestic buildings due to th e cost of purchasing carbon credits 
for consumption. Its final year of reporting is Jul y 2019 for the financial year of 2018/19.  
This will now be replaced by an additional charge w ithin the Climate Change Levy, 
continuing the aim to reduce consumption and improv e energy efficiency. 
 
The Climate Change Plan (2018) is the 3 rd  report on proposals and policies from the 
Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009.  The report ide ntifies how Scotland intends to deliver 
a low carbon economy. Aligning with the EU 2030 fra mework it looks to increase use of 
low carbon technologies (including heat) and the co ntinued and enhanced improvements 
to buildings.  It also identifies further emission reductions in: 
 
• Transport (37%); 
• Industry (21%); and 
• Waste (52%). 
 
The EES Route Map has two key policy areas to deliv er: fuel poverty and climate change. 
It sets out a timelines with incremental targets ai med to improving both domestic and non-
domestic buildings.  For the first time it sets out  targets for both the private rented sector 
and owner occupation as well as setting a specific target for homes with fuel poor 
households. 
 
As a local authority, there are other key pieces of  regulation and legislation that contribute 
to reducing carbon emissions: 
 
• The Assessment of Energy Performance of Non-Domest ic Buildings (Scotland) 
Regulations 2016; 
• Planning (Scotland) Act 2006; 
• Waste (Scotland) Regulations 2012. 
• Environmental Act 1995; 
• Air Quality Standards (Scotland) Regulations. 
 
The Plan for North Lanarkshire is the main strategi c document for the council and its 
partners (see Figure 2) and focuses on 5 priorities  with outcomes driven by clear aims and 
supported by clear actions. The Carbon Management P lan 2019-2022 contributes to the 
delivery of The Plan for North Lanarkshire and enab les the council to act: 
 
• in the way best calculated to contribute to delive ry of the Climate Change (Scotland) 
Act's emissions reduction targets; Carbon Management Plan 2019-2022 
8 • in the way best calculated to deliver any statutor y adaptation 3 programme; and 
• in a way that it considers most sustainable. 
 
Figure 2 – Local Strategic Context 
 
 
 
(*Pilot project) 
 
North Lanarkshire Council is committed to high stan dards of governance and has an 
integrated framework that brings together legislati ve requirements, governance principles, 
and management processes.  Arrangements are based o n key aspects of: 
 
• Openness in decision making, management arrangement s, and in dealing with the 
public. 
• Integrity in ensuring high standards of conduct, pr opriety, and probity in running the 
council’s business and managing public funds. 
• Accountability in ensuring that the council, its me mbers and officers are responsible 
for their decisions and actions, and are subject to  appropriate external scrutiny. 
• Inclusiveness in communicating and engaging with al l sections of the community and 
encouraging active participation. 
 
The council’s corporate governance arrangements are  designed to ensure that business is 
conducted in accordance with the law and that publi c money is safeguarded, properly 
accounted for, and used efficiently and effectively .  Elected Members and senior officers 
are responsible for implementing the governance arr angements and the framework is 
assessed on an annual basis to ensure ongoing effec tiveness and compliance. 
                                                           
3 climate change 
Carbon Management Plan 2019-2022 
9  
The council’s governance framework comprises the sy stems, processes, cultures and 
values by which the council is directed and control led.  It enables the council to monitor the 
achievement of its objectives and consider whether those objectives have led to the 
delivery of appropriate and cost-effective services .  The council is responsible for 
reviewing and monitoring each element of the framew ork and providing evidence of 
compliance. 
 
The council’s wider governance arrangements include : 
• identifying and setting out the council’s prioritie s in The Plan for North Lanarkshire  
and in other policy statements agreed by the counci l; 
• monitoring of the achievement of objectives by the council and senior officers; 
• a systematic approach to monitoring service perform ance at both officer and elected 
member levels including targets against which finan cial and operational performance 
can be assessed and regular reporting on performanc e to council committees; 
• clearly setting out the remits, functions and power s of committees and sub 
committees in a scheme of administration and alloca ting delegated powers to officers; 
• Financial Regulations that specify relevant procedu res and controls over budgeting, 
income, expenditure and financial performance; 
• comprehensive budget and expenditure monitoring sys tems; 
• clearly defined capital expenditure guidelines 
• a Monitoring Officer to ensure compliance with laws  and regulations; 
• an Audit and Governance Panel whose activities and core functions comply with 
relevant CIPFA standards for audit committees; and 
• highlighting expected standards of behaviour in Cod es of Conduct for elected 
members, chief officers and employees. 
 
An additional element of the governance framework a nd a key part of the system of 
internal control is the council’s risk management a rrangements which are designed to 
identify, assess, prioritise and mitigate risks to the achievement of the council’s priorities. 
[Extract from Annual Governance Statement]. 
 
Carbon Management Group 
 
The Carbon Management Group was formed in June 2016  and its role is to co-ordinate the 
delivery of sustainable actions and reduce the emis sion of greenhouse gases.  The group 
utilises a multi-service approach to improving the council’s response to climate change, 
operating within the council’s governance framework .  
 
The group is comprised of officers from across the council and ensures that the carbon 
reduction agenda is embedded throughout the organis ation. The group mainly has a 
strategic role, while individual services are respo nsible for policy and project delivery.  
Meeting on a quarterly basis, the group’s strategy is to ensure that the council’s services 
engage and contribute to the delivery of the Carbon  Management Plan. 
 Carbon Management Plan 2019-2022 
10 The group also has the responsibility for the annua l Public Sector Climate Change Duties 
Report submission and this includes: 
 
• data collection from stakeholder services; 
• a data audit carried out annually which includes t he identification of good practice 
and recommendations for services to consider for ac tion; 
• compilation and submission of the final report. 
 
 
Figure 3 – Carbon Management Governance Structure 
 
 
 
 
 
Section 2 – Targets 
 
Organisational boundaries 
 
For the purposes of this plan, the council’s carbon  footprint is calculated using information 
about energy used by corporate buildings from which  the council and its trusts i.e. North 
Lanarkshire Leisure and CultureNL, deliver services  from.  The footprint also includes the 
Carbon Management Plan 2019-2022 
11 corporate fleet and private car use for business tr avel (grey fleet), all municipal waste 
(domestic and non-domestic) and water (supply and t reatment).  The organisational 
boundary does not include North Lanarkshire Propert ies commercial and industrial 
properties customers’ consumption. 
 
Housing is not considered when calculating the foot print of the council as this is an area 
where the council does not have direct control on e nergy usage. Within this plan however 
you will find a section on housing as it is evident  that domestic consumption savings can 
make a significant contribution to achieving the na tional carbon reduction targets. The 
council’s participation in the Scottish Governments  Local Heat and Energy Efficiency 
Strategy pilot will enable us to continue to develo p a response to addressing aspects of 
fuel poverty in order to achieve the 2040 target wh ilst reducing carbon emissions. 
 
North Lanarkshire Council’s organisational boundary  for scoping the extent of its carbon 
footprint includes: 
 
• energy consumption relating to buildings used by b oth the council and its trusts for 
non-domestic purposes, street lighting; 
• the council’s own fleet and business travel (grey fleet); 
• all municipal (household and commercial) waste. 
 
The figure below provides an overview of the organi sational boundary and exclusions. 
 
Figure 4 – North Lanarkshire Council Carbon Boundar ies  
 
 
Carbon Management Plan 2019-2022 
12 Historic Targets 
 
In February 2010, the council’s first carbon manage ment plan was presented to 
Environmental Services Committee. The plan was deli vered until 31 March 2014 and set a 
reduction target of 25% against the 2006/07 baselin e for the duration of the plan. From 
2006/07-2015/16 the council reduced its carbon foot print by 26%. 
 
In 2015/16 a new baseline was identified with a tar geted reduction of 9,987 carbon tonnes 
to be achieved by 31 March 2019.  Progress against the carbon reduction target has been 
monitored on an annual basis via the Public Sector Climate Change Duties Report.  The 
final position will be reported via this mechanism and thereafter to committee following its 
November 2019 submission date. 
 
Table 1 - Carbon Footprint 2015/16 (Baseline) 
 2015/16 
 Carbon Emissions 
(tCO2e) 
Stationary  74,509  
Waste   35,759  
Transport 6,806  
Total   117,075  
Carbon Indicator: Carbon emissions per FTE employee s 9.1  
 
 
Current Footprint  
 
The council’s estate is under continuous change as the council looks to improve the 
efficiency and use of its buildings, whilst improvi ng the efficiency of its service delivery. 
This has led to reductions in emission by specific sites or service areas within the council. 
 
The table below shows that the council’s stationary  emissions which include electricity and 
natural gas consumption account for over half (52.5 %) of the council’s emissions.   Over 
the past two years the emission source has reduced by 9,793 tCO2e, achieving 98% of 
the overall targeted carbon reduction. This has bee n achieved by energy projects 
delivered via the Non Domestic Energy Efficiency Fr amework and improvements to the 
authority’s street lighting infrastructure.  Improv ements in the council’s fleet has also 
provided a reduction in transport emissions. 
 
Table 2 - Carbon Footprint 2017/18 
 2017/18 
 Carbon Footprint 
(tCO2e) 
Stationary 63,955  
Waste 51,234  
Transport 6,535  
Total  121,725  
Carbon Indicator: Carbon emissions per FTE employee s 9.5  
 
In 2017 the council introduced an improved domestic  waste collection regime to facilitate 
the achievement of the Scottish Government’s 2020 ( 60%) and 2025 (70%) recycling 
targets whilst achieving the limit of 5% waste to l andfill by 2025.  It was anticipated that Carbon Management Plan 2019-2022 
13 additional resources at the beginning of the new re gime would be required to ensure that 
households had ‘clean bins’ i.e. their bins did not  contain any materials that they should 
not.  This timed amnesty approach to the domestic w aste collection led to a notable 
increase in waste emissions (15,475 tCO2e) from the  baseline. 
 
Performance against the council’s 2019 carbon reduc tion target will be reported via the 
Public Sector Climate Change Duties Report November  2019 submission. Projections to 
date indicate that the 2019 carbon reduction target  will be comfortably achieved. This can 
be attributed to significant reductions in waste to  landfill during the course of the year 
coupled with reductions achieved through other sign ificant council projects. 
 
Figure 6 provides a summary of the council’s emissi ons.  The council’s sources of 
stationary emissions are electricity, natural gas, gas oil, Kerosene burning oil and, the 
supply and treatment of water. In 2017/18, stationa ry emissions accounted for 63,955 
tonnes of carbon. In planning its future carbon red uction projects, a significant focus will be 
on those that can reduce the council’s use of gas a nd electricity. 
 
Figure 5 – North Lanarkshire Council’s Carbon Footp rint by Emission Source (2017/18)  
 
 
Waste includes all waste to landfill, waste to comb ustion, composting and recycling. 
Emissions resulting from waste to landfill are sign ificantly higher than recycled waste, 
accounting for 97% of total waste emissions.  
 
The council’s own fleet account for the majority of  transport emissions however the ‘grey 
fleet’ i.e. business travel accounts for 18% of thi s emission source and has the potential to 
be reduced in future years with improved use of pub lic transport and the council’s pool 
cars. 
 
 
Target for 2022  
 
Figure 7 provides a comparison of the baseline year  with subsequent and future years. For 
2018/19 a projected carbon footprint has been calcu lated and this is based on the 
realisation of current project savings.  The BAU fo otprint shows that if the council do not 
continue to investigate in carbon reduction project s, the most likely outcome is that the 
footprint will remain the same. 
 
 
  
Carbon Management Plan 2019-2022 
14 Figure 6 – North Lanarkshire Council’s Historic, Cu rrent & Business As Usual Footprints  
 
 
The figure below compares the BAU footprints with t hose where the expected project 
savings are realised in future years. It should be noted that at time of writing detail of 
projects for 2020/21 were not available and therefo re further anticipated savings may be 
achieved in the final year of this plan. 
 
Figure 7 – Value at Stake (Forecast Project Savings  2017-2022)  
 
 
Taking into account carbon reduction projects alrea dy in progress combined with 
anticipated further project delivery in 2020/21 has  informed target setting resulting in a 
further targeted carbon footprint of 91,665 tCO2e.  This is equivalent to a 21% reduction 
from the baseline year and 14% reduction from 2019 target of 107,088 tCO2e. Based on 
current staffing levels, this will also result in a  reduced ‘carbon tonnes emissions per 
employee (FTE)’ of 7.2. 
 
 
  
Carbon Management Plan 2019-2022 
15 Section 3 – Projects and Activities 
 
Historic energy efficiency projects 
 
With the launch of the Central Energy Efficiency Fu nd (CEEF) in 2004, the council utilised 
its award of £929,539 to enable delivery of carbon reduction projects to the value of 
£2,861,149 in key areas within its estate until 201 6 when the fund closed.  
 
Early 2017, the council decided to utilise the Non Domestic Energy Efficiency Framework 
to assist the delivery of its carbon saving project s.  The NDEE framework was developed 
by the Scottish Government to provide a framework t o deliver the retrofit of energy 
efficiency works to existing non−domestic public bu ildings or grounds. 
 
Each NDEEF project is eligible for Scottish Governm ent funding (up to £50K) to pay for the 
assistance provided by the project support unit (PS U), delivered by a singular contractor 
framework, Mott MacDonald. The PSU brings added val ue to utilisation of the framework 
for the council as they identify additional energy saving measures above the council’s 
original project requirements: provide a range of a ssistance including business case 
development as well as process and contractor manag ement support. 
 
A rolling fund was set up in 2017/18 utilising £500 k of Salix funding which was matched 
with the council’s capital monies. The rolling fund  is used to deliver carbon saving energy 
efficiency projects which are mainly delivered via the NDEEF. It is anticipated that through 
the reinvestment of project savings, the fund will become self-sustaining. Projects are 
subject to further review by Salix, ensuring they c omply with the requirements of the fund 
i.e. payback no more than 8 years and to a maximum cost of £250 per tonne of carbon 
dioxide saved. 
 
Planned and future projects  
 
Table 3 - Carbon Savings Projects 2019-2021 
Project Amount 
of 
Savings 
(kWh, 
Tonnes) Carbon 
Savings 
(tCO2e)  
Clyde Valley Residual Waste Project 33,202  19,474  
NDEE Phase 1- boiler upgrades and solar thermal ins tall 604,957  186  
NDEE Phase 1- CHP install 497,882  92  
NDEE Phase 1- LED lighting upgrades 1,333,508  410  
LED (Street Lighting) - other 58,000  18  
LED (Street Lighting) 1,117,260  343  
NDEE Phase 2 Lighting upgrade 800,973  246  
NDEE Phase 2 Boiler upgrade 339,834  61  
NDEE Phase 2 CHP Install 476,235  88  
Average savings used to project for 2021/22 savings  
(kWh) 9,014,650  2,769  
Total    23,687  
 Carbon Management Plan 2019-2022 
16 The table above provides an overview of the planned  projects with their respective source 
savings and potential first full year carbon saving s.  Savings will be realised from 2019/20 
through to 2020/21, with an estimated savings for 2 021/22 based on current and future 
project expectations. The projects delivered in 201 9/20 will achieve a reduction of 1,030 
tCO2e primarily in electricity savings.  Further sa vings of 122 and 2,769 (tCO2e) in the two 
successive years will be due to realised consumptio n savings in both gas and electricity. 
 
Figure 8 – Carbon Savings Projects by Source (2019- 2021)  
 
 
The project list (table 3) is not exhaustive as it does not include projects where the detail 
has either not been confirmed or the output result is difficult to quantify. Examples of this 
would be: 
 
‘FuelGood Driver Training’ and the Council’s Fleet:   
 
The council participates in the Energy Savings Trus ts ‘FuelGood Driver Training’ as it 
contributes to a reduction in the council’s transpo rt emissions through a reduced fuel 
consumption within the fleet.  Below is some highli ghts of improvements within the 
council’s fleet: 
 
• Replaced 24 bin lorries with Euro6 compliant vehic les increasing the council’s 
compliance to 75%. 
• In 2019 there will an additional 5 new fuel effici ent Euro6 bin lorries. 
• Switched on Fleets 2017/18 grant funding was used to procure an additional 7 
Nissan Leaf electric cars for the pool car fleet an d further funding in funding will see 
4 fully electric Renault Master vans joining the fl eet in 2019. These vehicles will be 
used to deliver school meals. 
• The low emissions vehicle fleet stands at 31 (5 hy brids and 26 fully electric 
vehicles). 
 
Efficient and Cleaner Operations (ECO) Stars – Flee t Recognition Scheme 
 
This scheme, delivered locally by the council, aims  to assist organisations who are making 
changes to their fleet (buses, coaches and goods ve hicles) in order to improve their 
efficiency and emissions by reducing fuel consumpti on.  Scheme members’ participation 
contributes to improvements in air quality, a reduc tion in overall emissions and to the 
climate change agenda. 
Carbon Management Plan 2019-2022 
17  
Waste: 
 
In 2017, 3.83 million tonnes of waste in Scotland w ent to landfill, of which 32% was 
household and similar type waste.  The national rec ycle rate for household waste in the 
same year was 45.6%.  In 2017 North Lanarkshire: 
 
• generated 156,813 tonnes of household rubbish; 
• 39.6% of rubbish was recycled; 
• had a whole-life  carbon impact of 406,737 tCO2e (household waste). 
 
The Clyde Valley Residual Waste Project is a multi- authority (East Renfrewshire Council, 
East Dunbartonshire Council, North Ayrshire Council , North Lanarkshire Council and 
Renfrewshire Council) initiative for the treatment and disposal of residual waste where the 
council’s participation will realise an initial sav ing of 19,474 tCO2e in 2020/21.  The project 
is for 25 years and will commence December 2019.  T he project will be delivered by 
Viridor Clyde Valley Limited and significantly cont ribute to the councils reduction in waste 
to landfill.  
 
Biodiversity: 
 
The Nature Conservation (Scotland) Act 2004 require s the council to advance the 
conservation of biodiversity. The Act states ‘ It is the duty of every public body and office 
holder in exercising any functions, to further the conservation of biodiversity so far as it is 
consistent with the Property exercise of those func tions ’.  In complying with the Act the 
council also looks to promote the survival of speci es that have been impacted by climate 
change. 
 
Healthy peatlands can absorb carbon and trap and st ore it, thus preventing it going into 
the atmosphere. Bogs that are degraded emit carbon dioxide and other greenhouse 
gases. Restoring peatlands ensures that they will c ontinue to contribute to the reduction of 
Scotland’s carbon emissions. There are a significan t number of peatlands/bogs in North 
Lanarkshire of which: 
 
• 6 are Sites of Special Scientific interests (SSIs)  of which 3 are special areas of 
conservations (SACs); 
• 70 are designated, at least in part, as Sites of I mportance for Nature Conservation 
(SINCs); 
• 3 are Local Nature Reserves. 
 
In line with the Wildlife and Natural Environment ( Scotland) Act 2011, the council produces 
a report every 3 years evidencing its application o f the 2004 Act and subsequent 
regulations (1994 and 2010).  The Biodiversity Duty  Report 2015-18 highlighted the 
following: 
• Woodland In and Around Towns (WIAT) project (Thorn wood Woods, Tannochside 
and Newarthill Woods, Motherwell); 
• Improvements or community events at the 9 Local Na ture Reserves:- 
o Water vole improvements (Brownsburn Community Natu re Park); 
o Wildflower meadow planting (Braedale Hill and King shill); 
o Bog restoration (Greenhead Moss); 
o Woodland management (Cambusnethan); Carbon Management Plan 2019-2022 
18 o New great crested newt habitat (Gartcosh); 
o Improved entrance features (Ravenswood); 
o Community event (Mosswater); and 
o River restoration (Drumbeck). 
 
BS EN ISO 14001 : 2015 - Environmental Management S ystems 
 
A number key services within the council are indepe ndently certified to this standard.  It 
covers the following operational areas:- 
 
• Environmental Health 
• Fleet Operations 
• Trading Standards 
• Waste solutions 
• Environmental Facility Management 
• Environmental Asset Maintenance 
 
The standard encourages organisations such as the c ouncil to: 
 
• minimise the negative impact on the environment ca used by its activities; 
• comply with legislation and regulation and other e nvironmental standards; 
• continuously improve to achieve the above. 
 
Culture NL and NL Leisure: 
 
The council’s arm’s length organisations, CultureNL  and NL Leisure both benefit from 
energy efficiency improvements such as lighting upg rades delivered by the corporate 
energy team (NDEE phase 1 and phase 2 projects).  T here is also a great deal of other 
positive activity that contributes to the reduction  in carbon emissions: 
 
• Council food and drink outlets have changed drinki ng straws from plastic to paper.  
They also encourage the use of reusable cups rather  than disposable through a 
price incentive. 
• All water fountains are now mains fed. 
• Plastic dog waste bags and also food waste bags ar e available at local libraries. 
• Both the libraries and museums donate items no lon ger safe or suitable to use to a 
charity who train ex-offenders in woodwork and meta lwork. 
• Via NL Industries, furniture such as computer chai rs are recovered, rather than 
buying replacements. 
• Summerlee removed ‘personal’ wastepaper baskets an d replaced these with ‘bin 
stations’ to encourage less waste, correct waste di sposal 
• Curatorial Services reuses and recycles exhibition  materials where possible and 
tries to limit what is sent to landfill.  
• Lunch clubs operated within community facilities a re provided with food waste bins. 
• CultureNL operate 68 community facilities and thei r use is continually reviewed to 
ensure their operation matches demand. 
 
  Carbon Management Plan 2019-2022 
19 Communication and Campaigns: 
 
Earth Hour occurs each year on the last Saturday in  March.  This is a 
global event which North Lanarkshire participates i n through the 
‘switch off’ event and awareness raising via ‘Pass the Panda’. 
 
In 2018 the council was awarded ‘Super Local Author ity’ status by the 
World Wildlife Fund (WWF) Scotland for demonstratin g its commitment 
to action on climate change. 
 
The council also takes part in the 
Scottish Government’s Climate 
Week. The council’s campaign promotes individual 
behavioural change such as domestic energy use 
and personal travel to show how carbon savings and 
changing the way we do things can help our planet.  
 
 
Climate Ready Clyde: 
 
The council participates in the Climate Ready Clyde  initiative which looks to develop a 
Climate Adaptation Strategy with supporting action plan for Glasgow City Region. In 
November 2018, ‘Towards a Climate Ready Clyde: Clim ate Risks and Opportunities for 
Glasgow City Region’ was published. It follows a co llaboration of partners and 
stakeholders, and identified key priorities and are as that need to be progress whilst 
sustaining existing levels of activity in areas suc h as flood risk prevention and air quality. 
 
Other council activity 
 
The council has introduced an environmental impact section within its committee reports to 
evidence that both carbon and environmental effects  of decision making have been 
considered.   
 
Resources 
 
The council through using its own monies, and maxim ising its use of external funding, will 
continue to improve the sustainability and energy e fficiency of its assets to the benefit of its 
carbon footprint.  
 
 
 
  
Carbon Management Plan 2019-2022 
20 Section 4 – Action Plan & The Plan for North Lanark shire  
 
The following table summarises the council’s ‘addre ss, adapt and act’ areas of work.  This 
section will be updated with revisions during the c ourse of this plan. 
 
Table 4 - Climate Related Actions 2019-2023 
Action  Timescale  Action Origin  Responsibility  
Investigate different communication tools 
with a view to designing and implementing a 
council wide engaging communication plan to 
target and encourage potential areas of 
carbon savings. 
 
2019-2022  Carbon 
Management 
Plan Carbon Management 
Group To continue to develop the councils asset 
information to inform and underpin future 
project development and carbon savings. 
To continue to evaluate further use of 
technologies to continually improve the 
council’s energy efficiency, resulting in the 
reduction of the council’s carbon footprint 
and improvement in source data. 
To support the pilot Local Heat and Energy 
Efficiency Strategy project. 
To support the review of the use of ‘grey 
fleet’ for business travel. 
‘Sites of Special Scientific Interest’ sites to be 
in a local bogs management scheme 
2020 North 
Lanarkshire 
Biodiversity 
Action Plan Head of Integrated Street 
and Community Services Refuse new applications for extraction 
consents on all European, national and 
locally designated peatlands. 
Promote awareness of the biological and 
cultural importance of mosses to local 
communities adjacent to lowland 
raised/intermediate bogs 
Undertake favourable management works to 
improve council owned bog sites 
Collate information on council owned bogs 
regarding their condition and management 
The Council will strive to reduce car journeys 
for work purposes e.g. by teleconferencing. 
For instances where work travel is necessary 
the Council’s pool car fleet will be utilised 
with electric/hybrid vehicles provided where 
possible. 2021 Air Quality 
Action Plan 
2018-2021 Head of Regulatory 
Services & Waste 
Solutions Carbon Management Plan 2019-2022 
21 Action  Timescale  Action Origin  Responsibility  
Further consideration will be given to 
reducing the number of private vehicles used 
for Council business, introducing 
bus/sustainable transport where possible. 
Tracking devices will continue to be fitted to 
NLC fleet vehicles in order to provide 
information on managing idling/speeding and 
unnecessary journeys. 
Driver Certificate of Professional 
Competence training will be provided for all 
Council drivers, including modules on safe 
and efficient driving. 
The Council will continue to increase the 
provision of electric vehicle (EV) charging 
points, where possible ensuring these are 
accessible to both council staff and the 
general public. The Council will engage with 
other public sector agencies (e.g. NHS 
Lanarkshire) to encourage similar provision 
to ensure adequate coverage of EV charge 
points across NLC area. Head of Integrated Street 
and Community Services 
The Council will abide by their statutory duty 
of sustainable procurement and include 
vehicle standards in the sustainability section 
of the sourcing methodology documentation, 
which will consequently feed through into the 
specification/award criteria where 
appropriate. Head of Assets and 
Procurement 
The Council will continue to progress their 
Workplace Travel Plan especially in view of 
other relevant NLC policies, such as property 
rationalisation, home working policy etc. Head of Environmental 
Assets 
Implementation of new Clyde Valley Residual 
Waste Project - waste management facility 
shared with peer councils by 2019. 
2020 
/ ongoing 
Risk Register Executive Director, 
(Enterprise and 
Communities) Maximising external funding opportunities 
and other resources to facilitate energy 
savings projects through teams across the 
Council. 
LED street lighting investment programme 
completion  Head of Integrated Street 
and Community Services 
Implementation of Monitoring & Targeting 
software – Energy Management 
Head of Assets and 
Procurement Development of Local Heat and Energy 
Efficiency Strategy 
Enhance reporting process (both internal and 
external) as identified at the “Gaps in 
Assurances” section 2019 Carbon Management Plan 2019-2022 
22 Action  Timescale  Action Origin  Responsibility  
Energy Efficiency project delivery via the Non 
Domestic Energy Efficiency Framework. 2023 
Ensuring that most appropriate stakeholders 
participate at relevant stage of initiatives and 
projects using Corporate Project 
Management methodology and through 
Carbon Management Working Group Ongoing 
 
The Programme of Work which supports The Plan for N orth Lanarkshire contains activities 
that will impact on the council’s climate and carbo n agenda.  The following table contains a 
high level extract of this programme of work activi ty. 
 
Table 5 – Programme of Work (The Plan for North Lan arkshire) 
Ref  Description  Ambition 
Statement 
Reference 4 
P002 Asset review and rationalisation 22,24 
P005 Inclusive growth (tackling poverty) 11 
P007 Communication Strategy 4 
P009 Strategic Policy Framework 24,25 
P011 Three year revenue budget strategy 21 
P013 New Supply Programme 1 
P014 Tower Strategy 1 
P015 Housing Investment Programme 1 
P017 Fuel Poverty 11,12 
P019 Finalise updated Local Development Plan 3 
P020 Town centre and community regeneration 2,3 
P021 City Deal / infrastructure 3 
P023 Marketing and tourism 4 
P025 Parks master planning 16,17, 22 
P026 Co-ordination of environmental assets 16,17, 22 
P028 Shared services 22 
P029 Energy and carbon management 22 
P047 Schools new build programme 22, 24 
                                                           
4 The North Lanarkshire Ambition Statements can be f ound at the end of this document Carbon Management Plan 2019-2022 
23 Ref  Description  Ambition 
Statement 
Reference 4 
P055 Community asset mapping 19, 20, 21 
P059 Improve procurement capability 5 
P061 Employee learning and development programmes – Lear n NL 23 
  Carbon Management Plan 2019-2022 
24 Section 5 – Housing & Energy Efficiency  
 
As the council does not control individual househol ds’ energy consumption and resulting 
carbon emissions, it does not include this when cal culating its own carbon footprint.  
Carbon emissions from domestic energy use however a ccounts for 30.9% 5 of all 
emissions reported by the Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy within 
North Lanarkshire.   
 
Although our population is predicted to marginally increase over the next 10 years 6, there 
will be a significant increase in the number of sin gle person households resulting in more 
dwellings.  Many of these households will be older people who require a warmer heating 
regime than younger households, and as they are at home more frequently they use more 
energy.  It therefore can be assumed that domestic carbon emissions in North Lanarkshire 
will continue to increase if energy efficient solut ions are not implemented. 
 
The targeted reduction of domestic emissions is a n ational priority which is achieved 
through the delivery of more energy efficient homes  as well as tackling household 
behaviour.  The council, as a local authority and a  social landlord, has a strategic 
responsibility to domestic energy efficiency, fuel poverty and climate change. 
 
New Build Council Housing 
 
All council housing developments through the Afford able Housing Supply Programme 
meet the Building Standards Sustainability Level of  Silver (Aspects 1 & 2) in order to 
maximise on available Scottish Government funding. 
   
As part of the site planning/brief development proc ess, renewable energy sources are 
assessed in terms of site suitability, costs and be nefits. The council new build to date have 
achieved on average a ‘B’ rating (SAP rating 80+).  Since March 2016 EPC documents 
have indicated SAP ratings between 86(B) and 91(B) being achieved for council 
developments with corresponding Environmental (CO2)  ratings ranging from 89(B) and 
95(A).  This high level of energy efficiency should  result in lower fuel bills than experienced 
by residents in their former homes. 
 
The council is seeking to develop wider opportuniti es for sustainable housing by 
examining, piloting and introducing innovative appr oaches to: 
 
• renewable energy provision 
• consideration of district heating systems for fut ure larger developments 
• options for properties where they are currently o ff the mains gas network. 
 
Council’s Historic Stock 
 
North Lanarkshire Council, like other social landlo rds, is required to continue to ensure 
their housing stock meets the Scottish Housing Qual ity Standard (SHQS) beyond 31 
March 2015, requiring further investment in mainten ance and improvements. The Energy 
Efficiency Standard for Social Housing (EESSH) repl aced one of the five energy efficiency 
                                                           
5 UK local authority and regional carbon dioxide emi ssions national statistics: 2005-2016 (2018) 
6 1% from 2016-2026 (National Records of Scotland Po pulation Projections for Scottish Areas (2016-based )) Carbon Management Plan 2019-2022 
25 elements within SHQS. It introduced a minimum energ y rating for stock and is informed by 
stock type and heating. 
 
Table 6 - Summary of Energy Rating Targets for EESS H 
 SAP 2009 SAP 2012 
House Type Gas Electric Gas Electric 
Detached 60 D 60 D 60 D 57 D 
Terraced, semi-
detached 69 C 65 D 69 C 62 D 
Four-in-a-block flat 65 D 65 D 65 D 62 D 
All other flats 69 C 65 D 69 C 63 D 
 
 
Excluding housing stock built in the last ten years , the council’s historic stock accounts for 
35,799 dwellings with a number of areas with no nat ural gas supply. A considerable 
amount of money has been spent on improvements incl uding: insulation, heating and 
window replacement.  In areas with no natural gas, it is the council’s intention to upgrade 
the heating system using air source heat pumps. The  focus on EESSH will positively 
impact on the carbon emissions of social housing (3 4% 7 of the homes) in North 
Lanarkshire. 
 
The RPP3 led to an unprecedented level of consultat ion on key areas within the climate 
change agenda in Scotland.  Two of these areas are EESSH beyond 2020 and fuel 
poverty.  
 
EESSH 2 follows the EES route map and looks to deli ver key targets by 2040 with all 
Scottish homes to achieve C rating where possible. It goes however a step further in terms 
of homes where the household is fuel poor i.e. requ iring a B rating by 2040. 
 
Table 3 - Summary of Energy Rating Targets for EESS H 2 (EPC Banding)  
House Type Gas Electric Biomass Other Fuel 
Detached C C C C 
Terraced, semi-
detached B B B C 
Four-in-a-block flat B B B C 
All other flats B B B C 
 
 
Home Energy Efficiency Programmes Scotland – Area B ased Schemes (HEEPS 
ABS): 
 
This funding is primarily targeted at fuel poverty (see below). Local authorities are 
expected to devise their schemes based on a number of factors such as deprivation, child 
                                                           
7Scottish House Condition Survey 2014-16 (2018) Carbon Management Plan 2019-2022 
26 poverty, stock condition and heat mapping. Local au thority projects are expected to be all 
tenure and deliver subsidised measures to private o wners. The funding is to be used 
solely to assist privately owned homes.  
 
The funding allocation is comprised of two elements  – the Core Allocation Programme 
(CAP) and Proposals for Additional Funding (PAF). T he scheme has a number of specific 
criteria which must be met in terms of the targetin g and delivery of the council’s projects 
and is expected to be complemented by the use of En ergy Company Obligation monies. 
The council has successfully accessed this and othe r funding over past few years however 
as the private sector accounts for 65% 8 of all housing in North Lanarkshire, further 
investment is required in order to significantly re duce carbon emissions. 
 
Table 3 - Summary of Domestic Energy Funding in Nor th Lanarkshire (2013-19) 
Year Grant Funding Element (£) 
Scottish Government 
Energy 
Company 
Obligation 
(ECO) Total Home Energy 
Efficiency 
Programmes 
for Scotland: 
Area Based 
Schemes 
(HEEPS: ABS)  Green Homes 
Cashback (GHCB)  Capital 
Acceleration 
Programme  
2013/14 3,298,730  513,750    2,569,153  6,381,633  
2014/15 2,907,100      372,582  3,279,682  
2015/16 2,986,443      221,200  3,207,643  
2016/17 3,105,042    51,000    3,156,042  
2017/18 2,136,824        2,136,824  
2018/19 2,214,082     2,214,082  
      20,372,906  
 
 
Fuel Poverty 
 
The current definition of fuel poverty is: A household is in fuel poverty if, in order to 
maintain a satisfactory heating regime, it would be  required to spend more than 10% of its 
income, including Housing Benefit and Income Suppor t for Mortgage Interest, on 
household fuel use.  
 
There are 3 main causes of fuel poverty and these a re: 
 
• Energy inefficiency (housing and/or household beha viour) 
• The cost of energy 
• Household income. 
 
It is estimated that 36,000 households are in some form of fuel poverty in North 
Lanarkshire and with 23,200 workless households, th e increasing challenges faced by 
many within our communities is evident.  
 
                                                           
8 Scottish House Condition Survey 2015-17 (Feb 2019)  Carbon Management Plan 2019-2022 
27 The Fuel Poverty (Target, Definition and Strategy) (Scotland) Bill when enacted will amend 
the definition to: Households should be able to afford the heating and  electricity needed for 
a decent quality of life. Once a household has paid  for its housing, it is in fuel poverty if it 
needs more than 10% of its remaining income to pay for its energy needs, and if this then 
leaves the household in poverty 9. 
 
With the 2016 target to eradicate fuel poverty in S cotland missed, a new ambition has 
been set to reduce fuel poverty in Scotland by 2040  so that no more than 5% of 
households are fuel poor. 
 
The council continues to try to address fuel povert y through a number of projects and 
campaigns beyond its responsibilities as a social l andlord. 
 
Pilot Local Heat and Energy Efficiency Strategy Pro ject:  
 
The council received funding to participate in a pi lot Local Heat and Energy Strategy 
project. Phase 1 of the project has been completed,  with the second phase to commence 
in 2019 which will be in the form of a socio-econom ic study. 
 
It Pays to Switch: 
 
The aim of the campaign is to contribute to reducin g fuel poverty within North Lanarkshire 
by saving residents money, enabling them to heat th eir homes to a comfortable level. It 
looks to encourage and empower householders to swit ch energy provider to access 
cheaper energy rates.  A refreshed relaunch of the campaign is expected in 2019 with a 
wider ambition to contribute to the council’s Tackl ing Poverty Strategy. 
 
Saving Energy, Saving Money:  
 
This section of the council’s website provides info rmation on current energy-related 
projects and assistance that is available to North Lanarkshire residents. It also provides 
energy advice to help residents to heat their home at a reasonable cost. 
                                                           
9 Simplified definition Carbon Management Plan 2019-2022 
28  
Section 6 – Green Risk Register 
 The full detail of the ‘green risks’ is held within  the corporate and individual services risk registe rs. 
 
Risk Statement  Inherent risk  Key Controls  Residual 
risk Key Further Actions  
L9 - Carbon Management 12  
9  
As a public body we do not comply with our legal obligations under the duties Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009 and related regulatory and legislative requirements.   • Carbon Management Working Group with 
evolving scope and plan , engaging 
relevant stakeholders and co-ordinating activities 
• Oversight and sponsorship by 
responsible Executive Director 
• Carbon Management agenda is an 
integral part in key strategic and operational activities: Asset & Procurement Solutions activities; Education and SC21; Waste management; Clyde Valley Residual Waste Project; Housing Property & Projects; Council owned electric vehicles; Street Lighting LED programme. 
• Liaison with other local authorities and 
external bodies through Scottish Energy Officers Network and SSN, includes benchmarking opportunities.  Scottish  Government through LHEES 
• Dedicated budget for Energy 
Management projects that will reduce consumption and improve the council’s ability o manage its energy consumption going forward 
• LED project - the contractor will have a 
dedicated project manager and monthly progress updates will be provided to 
maximise energy and carbon savings.  
Fortnightly operational and monthly  • Enhance reporting process (both internal 
and external)  
• Implementation of new Clyde Valley 
Residual Waste Project – waste management facility shared with peer councils by 2019. 
• LED street lighting investment programme 
completion 
• Energy Efficiency programme delivery via 
the Non Domestic Energy Efficiency Framework – Ongoing annual programme 
• Ensuring that most appropriate 
stakeholders participate at relevant stage of initiatives and projects using Corporate Project Management methodology and through Carbon Management Working Group 
• Maximising external funding opportunities 
and other resources to facilitate energy savings projects through teams across the Council. 
• Implementation of Monitoring & Targeting 
software – Energy Management 
• Development of Local Heat and Energy 
Efficiency Strategy We fail to identify and access other opportunities including grants that can maximise the benefit for the council and people of North Lanarkshire.   Carbon Management Plan 2019-2022 
29 Risk Statement  Inherent risk  Key Controls  Residual 
risk Key Further Actions  
performance meetings are held as part of the existing contract arrangements. KPIs are applied through the Contract and can lead to financial deductions being imposed and / or performance 
failure points being imposed which may           
result in contractor default. The contractor has provided a programme for completing phase one however should they fail to meet the forecast productivity this will have an impact of carbon savings identified against the project.  This will be monitored and mitigated by having robust contract and supplier management arrangements in place that will work alongside embedded Project Management activities.  The first phase of the project has been ongoing for 3 months and the contractor is working to programme with in excess of 5000 lanterns already in place. 
• In addition to the waste stream covered 
by the Clyde Valley Residual Waste Project, the Council will ensure, through procurement of suitable contracts, that smaller waste streams, such as those from the recycling centres, are treated in such a manner as to provide for the provisions of the proposed biodegradable municipal waste landfill ban from January 2020 
• Through the continued review of the 
Council’s Fleet, we will ensure that all vehicles purchased are in compliance with the most efficient vehicle emission standards and will also continue to increase the number of electric vehicles. Glossary  
 
Adaptation A planned or implemented change which lo oks to lower the 
arising risks of climate change 
Atmosphere Surrounds the earth and is made up of a number of gases 
Biomass Materials that originate from living or dea d organisms such as 
trees, animal waste 
Carbon dioxide A naturally occurring gas however ca n be produced by the 
burning of fossil fuels and biomass, and other acti vities.  It is 
CO 2 generated by human activities that is the main dri ver for 
climate change 
Carbon footprint The total of the greenhouse gases emitted into the 
atmosphere.  For the purposes of this document, the  carbon 
footprint referred to is solely that of North Lanar kshire Council 
Climate change Any notable change in the measures o f climate such as 
temperature, rainfall, wind patterns that occur ove r a period of 
time 
Emissions For the purpose of this document, this re fers to gases that are 
released into the atmosphere 
Energy efficiency To use less energy to do the same  thing such as using heating 
controls to reduce your energy consumption 
Global warming The global increase in the temperatu re near the earth’s 
surface 
Greenhouse gas A gas that absorbs infrared radiatio n in the atmosphere 
Landfill A site where waste is taken to be disposed , and thereafter is 
covered by soil 
Mitigation A deliberate act taken to reduce the hum an impact on the 
climate (To do no further harm to our planet) 
Natural gas Gases that occur underground such as me thane, propane and 
butane 
Recycling The collection and reprocessing of a reso urce to enable it to 
be reused 
Renewable 
Energy Energy resources that by their nature reoccur such as wind, 
solar, hydro, geothermal etc. 
Statutory Something that is required by regulation or law and can be 
subject to a penalty Carbon Management Plan 2019-2022 
1 Whole-life Carbon 
Impact This is the emission journey of waste: from the ext raction of 
the raw materials, manufacturing of the product thr ough to its 
disposal. 
 
  Carbon Management Plan 2019-2022 
2 North Lanarkshire Ambition Statements 
 
1. Ensure a housing mix that supports social inclus ion and economic growth. 
2. Refocus our town centres and communities to be m ulti-functional connected 
places which maximise social, economic, and environ mental opportunities. 
3. Maximise the use of our marketable land and asse ts through improved 
development in business and industrial infrastructu re. 
4. Market and promote North Lanarkshire as the plac e to live, learn, work, invest, 
and visit. 
5. Grow and improve the sustainability and diversit y of North Lanarkshire’s 
economy. 
6. Raise attainment and skills for learning, life, and work to enhance opportunities 
and choices. 
7. Enhance collaborative working to maximise suppor t and ensure all our children 
and young people are included, supported, and safe.  
8. Engage children and families in early learning a nd childcare programmes and 
making positive transitions to school. 
9. Invest in early interventions, positive transiti ons, and preventative approaches 
to improve outcomes for children and young people. 
10. Engage with children, young people, parents, ca rers, and families to help all 
children and young people reach their full potentia l. 
11. Increase economic opportunities for adults by u nderstanding, identifying, and 
addressing the causes of poverty and deprivation an d barriers to financial 
inclusion. 
12. Ensure our residents are able to achieve, maint ain, and recover their 
independence through appropriate supports at home a nd in their communities. 
13. Improve preventative approaches including self- management and giving people 
information and choice over supports and services. 
14. Ensure the highest standards of public protecti on. 
15. Encourage the health and wellbeing of people th rough a range of social, 
cultural, and leisure activities. 
16. Transform our natural environment to support we llbeing and inward investment 
and enhance it for current and future generations. 
17. Ensure we keep our environment clean, safe, and  attractive. 
18. Ensure our digital transformation is responsive  to all people’s needs and 
enables access to the services they need. 
19. Improve engagement with communities and develop  their capacity to help 
themselves. 
20. Improve the involvement of communities in the d ecisions, and development of 
services and supports, that affect them. Carbon Management Plan 2019-2022 
3 21. Continue to identify and access opportunities t o leverage additional resources 
to support our ambitions. 
22. Facilitate a North Lanarkshire wide approach to  asset rationalisation, including 
with communities and partners. 
23. Build a workforce for the future capable of del ivering on our priorities and 
shared ambition. 
24. Review and design services around people, commu nities, and shared 
resources. 
25. Ensure intelligent use of data and information to support fully evidence based 
decision making and future planning. 
  
 
  Carbon Management Plan 2019-2022 
4 If you require any further information on the conte nt of this document or the work of 
the Team, then please contact us: 
Carbon Management Group: Lynda Stevenson  
 
Phone: 01698 524969 
Email: Stevensonly@northlan.gov.uk 
Web: www.northlanarkshire.gov.uk  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 