 
 
 
 
  
Carbon Neutral Nottingham  
2020 – 2028 Action Plan 
 Version 2.0  16/06/2020     
 
 
Contents  
 
Foreword  1 
Carbon Neutral  3 
Framework  5 
Nottingham in 2028  8 
Governance, Funding & Engagement  9 
Working Together  12 
Section One – Carbon Reduction Chapters  14 
Chapter One: T ransport  17  
Chapter Two: The Built Environment  24 
Chapter Three: Energy Generation  30 
Chapter Four: Waste and Water  35 
Chapter Five: Consumption  39 
Section Two – Carbon Removal  44 
Section Three – Resilience & Adaptation  47 
Section Four – Ecology & Biodiversity  51 
Glossary  54 
 Foreword  /01 
 
Foreword  
Nottingham City Council has responded to the climate and 
environmental crisis by setting an ambition to become the first 
carbon neutral city in the UK by 2028. In keeping with Nottingham’s 
proud tradition of climate leadership, our carbon neutral charter s ets 
out a vision for sustainable carbon neutrality on behalf of the 
Council and the city’s Green Partnership.  
At the heart of this shared vision is an approach that not only 
positively addresses wider environmental challenges, but improves 
quality of life  and builds a new form of clean growth for our 
economy through a green industrial revolution.  
The science is clear; we need to act urgently to reduce our carbon 
emissions to limit global temperature rise to below 1.5oC, and so 
prevent devastating impacts a round the world and closer to home. It 
also shows we need to prepare for a changing climate.  
Climate Change is a long -lasting and universal problem that will 
affect everyone, particularly our most vulnerable citizens. It is also 
one that significantly affects the young of today and for generations 
to come. We are the stewards for the world they will inherit, and it is 
an essential role of local authorities to protect the security and 
welfare of those citizens who depend upon us.  
We are continuing our work  to create a prosperous, fair and resilient 
city for this and future generations.  
We have been at the forefront of what local authorities can achieve. 
The Nottingham Climate Change Declarations and our current strategies for energy and climate change have driven forward our 
progress and inspired others to do so.  
The actions we have taken have made a real difference to people’s 
homes, businesses, transport and to the way the Council operates. 
We’ve met our 2020 energy strategy emissions target early of 
reducing carbon dioxide ( CO 2) emissions by 26% from 2005 levels. 
The most recent figures from 2017 show a reduction of 41% for the 
city and 49% per person.  
We believe the approach we are taking will bring multiple benefits to 
the citizens, businesses and organ isations of Nottingham. Our 
carbon neutral charter sets out the principles, priorities and 
definitions of this approach, building on our previous successes and 
state -of-the-art knowledge.  
This is one of the most important and complex challenges any 
societ y has faced, which is why the Council has taken it to the core 
of how it operates, and why it is so pleased to be working with 
Green Partnership members to provide a genuine citywide  
response that can engage and support everyone in the city to take 
action.   
We all have a role to play in this, but we all have something to gain 
by finding more sustainable ways to live and work. Together with 
city partners, we will be creating new Climate Change and Energy 
plans for the next decade, to help set in motion this ambitious work 
and turn words into actions.  Foreword  /02 
 
Whilst we rightly celebrate the success that Nottingham has had, 
we know this is only the beginning. Together this Council, our 
partners and citizens of this city can take forward the ambitions of a 
locally responsible global city. There is a way forward o n this vital 
issue, and we believe that this plan is something Nottingham can be 
proud of in ensuring we are on the right track.  
 
Councillor Sally Longford   
Deputy Leader of the Council and Portfolio Holder  for Energy, 
Environme nt and Democratic Services
Carbon Neutral  /03 
 
Carbon Neutral
The Challenge  of Climate Change  
Why carbon neutral ? 
Over the past 50 years, the average global temperature has 
increased at the fa stest rate in recorded history and the trend is 
accelerating. 2019 was  the second warmest year on record, 
according to the World Meteorological Organization.  
When sunlight reaches the Earth, some of the energy is absorbed 
on the surface and re -radiated as infrared energy that we call heat. 
This goes back into the atmosphere  where greenhouse gases , such 
as Carbon Dioxide (CO 2) trap this heat and send it back out in all 
directions . This natural process  stops our planet being cold and is 
called t he ‘Greenhouse  Effect’ .   
Human activities , in particular, t he burning of fossil fuels for 
electricity , heating  and transport , are changing the balance of the 
Greenhouse E ffect. This is because we are emitting  more 
greenhouse gases, especially Carbon Dioxide. The increa se in 
these gases, which can last from years to centuries in the 
atmosphere, means we are trapping even more heat and causing 
the planet to get hotter. There are also pollutants like certain 
aerosols that can absorb incoming sunlight, further warming the 
atmosphere.    
These rising temperatures are now altering  the global climate 
resulting in longer and hotter heat waves, more frequ ent droughts, heavier rainfall,  rising sea levels and more powe rful storms and 
hurricanes.  This is seen in the retreat of glaci ers, rising sea levels , 
loss of habitats, floods , droughts  and fires around the world.  
As the frequency and scale of impacts increases with the changes 
in the climate that are forecas t, the threat becomes critical. The 
recent UN (IPCC) report from 2018  set out that an average global 
rise in temperature of 1.5oC above pre -industrial times would be an 
unacceptable risk. There is though  in truth , no safe level of global 
warming, and we have already seen a rise of 1oC, with each decade 
adding more than 0.2oC to that figure at the moment. This tells us 
that global  action is needed sooner  and efforts must be made to go  
faster and further in reducing  emissions to keep us safe .  
There is an  increasing threat to nature and the ecosystems we rely 
upon. The continu ing, unprecedented loss of biodiversity around the 
world is putting a vast number of species at risk from extinction.  
This poses an immense threat to our livelihoods with substantial 
risks to the economy, social well -being and the natural environment.  
The risks from these issues are  very high, and the time to act is 
short. Not acting upon them is inconceivable. This means that our 
response has to be to put these issues at the forefront of what we 
do, and to embed it everywhere and in everything.   Carbon Neutral  /04 
 
On the 1 3th January 2020, Nottingham City Council acknowledged 
the scale of this challenge by declaring a Climate and Ecological 
Emergency at Full Council, recognising the immediate action 
required to achieve sustainable carbon neutrality.    
 
It is a global issue where every person, every place and every 
organisation has a role  to play. For the last 19 years, Nottingham 
City has shown  a proactive approach and commitment to tackling 
this climate emergency , developing  key strategies for Climate 
Change, Energy, Transp ort and Fuel Poverty. These have been 
vital drivers of Nottingham’s success in reducing harmful emissions 
and enhancing the city’s resilience.  
Nottingham has already reduced official citywide  CO 2 emissions by 
41% (49% reduction in per person emissions) fro m 2005. This considerable reduction was achieved through actions across 
industrial/commercial, transport and domestic sectors.  The city is 
also on track to meet the target of generating 20% of the City’s 
energy demand through low and zero carbon sources by  2020.  
The city’s  success stems from the successful implementation of key 
strategies and through our partnerships with local businesses, 
universities and other local authorities, enabling many forward -
thinking carbon reduction actions to take place.   
Howe ver, the city still emitted 1.17 million tonnes of CO 2 in 2017, 
enough to drive the average car 6 billion miles!   
 Now, Nottingham must go further to reduce emissions and lower its 
carbon footprint to play its part in preventing a dangerously warmer 
world.  The scale of the change in our citywide efforts required is 
shown in the graph opposite, with the green line showing where we 
want to be, and the blue line the absolute minimum to keep us in 
line with what science says is required. Nottingham must keep it s 
emissions between now and the end of the century below a 
scientifically determine amount, known as its ‘carbon budget’, 
otherwise risk contributing to a dangerously warmer world. Aiming 
for the minimum reduction though , brings a real risk of failing to 
make the changes in time and would also mean Nottingham 
missing out on the benefits of being a leader.   
The Carbon Neutral Charter (www.nottinghamcity.gov.uk/CN2028 ) 
recognis ed that tackling climate change needs to be done in a way 
that is  fair and  sustainable – improving and protecting our 
environment, economy and society. This sits at the heart of the 
city’s approach. Nottingham City Council will play a leading role in 
enabli ng, empowering and coordinating the city to tackle to the 
challenge, but it cannot achieve this alone. This plan  will only 
succeed with everyone’s involvement and support.0200400600800100012001400160018002000
2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050CO2Emissions (000's tons)
Historic Current Trend
12.5% Annual Reduction 22.3% Annual Reduction
Delayed ReductionFramework  /05 
 
Framework  
This plan builds on Nottingham 2028 Carbon Neutr al Charter  by 
setting out high -level objectives in order to achieve a resilient and 
carbon neutral Nottingham by 2028. These are broken down into 
four main sections:  
 Carbon Reduction Measures  
 Carbon Removal  
 Resilience and Adaption  
 Ecology and Biodiversity  
Waiting to take action is not an option. This plan sets out where we 
in Nottingham  need to go, and focusses on the actions we can start 
to take now. This provides an approach and platform to build on.  
There may be many ways to achieve the outcomes we need.  The 
plan is  not intended to plot a fixed and definitive course to carbon 
neutrality.  There will be further developments which cannot be 
accurately predicted.  It is essential that there is continuing 
involvement in the development and implementation of act ions from 
citizens, businesses, and other organisations in the city and further 
afield.  
To ensure the action plan remains valid for the entirety of the next 9 
years, it will be review ed on an annual basis. This will allow the 
latest research , technologies  and regulations  to be incorporated 
over time , as well as for learning from previous actions . This flexible approach will allow new partners, collaborators and 
stakeholders to continually contribute to the plan  and its actions . 
Nottingham’s approach to sus tainable carbon neutrality will 
integrate carbon reduction with sustainability and an ambition to 
identify and realise multiple benefits,  termed co -benefits.  
Co-benefits are deliberate or incidental positive outcomes across a 
range of other areas in additi on to the central aim of an intervention . 
An example of a co -benefit is moving towards more active travel to 
tackle air -quality also has benefits for health from exercise and 
mental wellbeing, and reducing carbon emissions.  
Sustainability, economic growth,  alleviating poverty and tackling 
climate change are all complementary and interlinked. Carbon 
neutrality  and clean growth have been part of the City’s and 
region’s plans for some time,  and will be at the heart of future plans 
for the economy.  
Nottingham must find new ways of doing things that can consider all 
these elements. This offers an opportunity to tackle key issues 
facing the city while simultaneously reducing the problems of 
inequality and maximising a range of benefits that improve people’s 
quality of life. This would make Nottingham a fairer city and society 
for all. Framework  /06 
 
Section 1 – Carbon Reduction  
This plan prioritises carbon reduction measures to increase the 
chance of staying within our carbon budget and me eting the 2028 
carbon neutral ambition. To do this, emission reduction rates would 
have to be in excess of 22.3% per year.  
This section is further broken down into five chapters  for activity:  
 Transport  
 The Built Environment  
 Energy Generation  
 Waste & Water  
 Consumption . 
Within each chapter, the plan identifies key objectives for achieving 
carbon neutrality and the steps we can take towards  it. These are 
summarised in the action tables, which  provide timescales for 
implementation as follows:  
 Short term: Actio ns that can start now and aim to complete 
within the first three  years of the plan (2020 – 2022)  
 Medium term: Actions which require further development to 
be implementable within years three to six of the plan (2023 – 
2025 ) 
 Long term: Actions that have dep endencies or require 
substantial development to be implementable within the final 
three years of the plan (2026 – 2028)  Section 2 – Carbon Removal  
The second section of this plan focusses on capturing carbon and 
offsetting residual greenhouse gas emissions that cannot be 
removed entirely.  Negative emissions technologies and offsetting 
could be used to neutralise remaining emissions.  These are broken 
down into three groups:  
 1. Local carbon sequestration – Using nature or geology 
around the city to take carbon from the atmosphere and store 
it. This could be stored in plants, trees and soil, or in 
underground spaces between rocks.   
 2. Carbon capture  – use of negative emissions technologies 
to capture carbon from the atmosphere and at point of source  
 3. Large scale c arbon offsetting  – activities outside the City 
that can offset the emissions we generate l ocally through 
other credible and transparent mechanisms.  
Section 3 – Resilience and Adaption  
The third section addresses the actions Nottingham must take to 
protect against unavoidable  harmful impacts of climate change.  
Whilst the global goal remains avoiding dangerous levels of climate 
change by keeping temperature rises below 1.5oC, impacts such as 
flooding and extreme temperatures  are already experienced locally . 
Section 4 – Ecology & Biodiversity  
This section explains the impo rtance of green and open spaces, 
and biodiversity, for climate change mitigation and adapt ation - 
unlocking other positive outcomes such as  improve ments in our 
physical and mental wellbeing  and enhancing  the local landscape . Framework  /07 
 
 
 
 
Nottingham in 2028  /08 
 
Nottingham in 2028  
A Safer City   A Healthy City   A City of Opportunities  
By becoming the UK’s first carbon neutral 
city, Nottingham will be helping safeguard 
the future of our children and future 
generations. Through adapt ation and 
resilience measures we will ensure the City 
and its residents are protected from t he 
worst impacts of unavoidable climate 
change.  Nottingham will be one of the healthiest 
places to live with clean air, green open 
spaces and locally produced healthy food. 
New networks of safe cycling routes and 
high quality vehicle free public spaces will 
make it easier for people to get regular 
exercise.  The Nottingham economy will be built on 
new sustainable technologies  creating high 
quality employment for our citizens and a 
worldwide reputation for innovation and 
excellence. New infrastructure 
developments will not only create jobs 
directly, but make Nottingham one of the 
best places for businesses to thrive.  
     
An Inclusive City  
  A City that takes care of its 
residents  
  A City where everyone is 
able to reach their full 
potential  
Nottingham will become one of the most 
equitable cities with new training 
opportunities to help Nottingham people 
benefit from the low carbon economy. We 
will continue to ensure the benefits from 
economic growth are felt by our citizens 
and lift people out of poverty . Nottingham will become one of the 
cheapest places to live and work in with low 
household fuel bills, affordable low carbon 
public transport, and high quality public 
services.  Nottingham will be one of the happiest 
places to live. Good quality homes, high 
employment, attractive public spaces and 
biodiverse ecosystems will improve the 
overall wellbeing of citizens and 
communities.  
Governance, Funding & Engagement  /09 
 
Governance, Funding & Engagement  
Governance  
Achieving our target to be carbon neutral by 2028 won’t work  
through business -as-usual approaches. It will require us to work in 
different  and new  ways to ensure we remain  agile  and joined -up to 
effectively solve and tackle  the issues we face . We will all need to 
focus on how to generate  and capture  more ideas, action s and 
resource s across the Council, its partners and the city.  
The following a re a number of propositions that need  to be explored 
in order to maximise our potential  for success : 
 For the City Council to e stablish a flexible and dedicated 
internal project team t o work a cross and with all appropriate 
Council services  led by its Energy Services . Members of this 
team to be seconded from within the Council to work 
exclusively on the project  
 Develop a network of Climate Champions  across the Council   
 Change the  style and venue  of meetings  to be more engaging 
for partnerships and community/business  to creatively 
address key challenges  
 Develop n ew forms of democratic involvement  
 Develop a ‘ carbon neutral by design ’ ethos where everything 
that is  proposed  or implemented across the organisation 
considers how it can be carbon neutral or contribute to reducing carbon as a matter of course . This will include being  
considered  from the outset in the City Council’s major projects 
assura nce process to inform decision ma king 
 Place a value on  carbon  emissions within financial and 
business planning that result from operational a ctivities  
Funding  
Key to implementing many of the actions to achieve the target will 
be the funding. Building a carbon neutral economy will create new 
opportunities for private and public sector investment. In addition to 
ensuring every pound of our capital is working towards carbon 
neutrality, we must also create a platform to attract investment to 
the c ity. Nottingham City Council  will take the following actions : 
 Consider how internal budget s are used effectively  to value 
and support work on carbon reduction  
 Review current asset portfolio and work with partners towards 
divestment from any fossil fuel rel ated investments  and 
campaign for divestment of the Nottinghamshire Local 
Government Pension Scheme  
 Identify appropriate ways to support  and incentivise  internal 
carbon  reduction or  offsetting projects  
 Explore the opportunities for providing a climate cha nge 
budget, through a variety of appropriate income sources  Governance, Funding & Engagement  /10 
 
Engagement  
Effective engagement of organisations’ workforce s, partner 
agencies, sectors and a ll people who live and  work  in, or visit , the 
city is essential to achieving  the ambition of being carbon neutral by 
2028.  Innovative and effective ways of doing this will form part of a 
communications plan and in clude the following considerations:  
 Undertake in-depth  stakeholder mapping  
 Develop a competition to encourage and support new 
community carbo n reduction ideas   
 Have a  more open and inclusive process on carbon  reduction  
plans, working with key partners and expert s across the city  
 Harness the city’s ideas, knowledge and  collective intelligence  
 Carry out community energy/sus tainability mapping  
 Develop community carbon reduction  champions  
 Engage and involve  schools and colleges  across the city.  
2028 Action Plan Consultation  
The 2028 Carbon Neutral Action Plan is a platform to build upon for 
the work ahead to sustainable carbon neutrality. The Plan is a 
document that will evolve in conjunction with Nottingham's 
stakeholders, through ongoing engagement and co -creation. The 
first step of this process was an eight -week citywide consultation, 
from January to March 2020, which gathered feedback on the draft 
Action Plan. The approach was to listen, inform and learn from 
citizens and partners.  Nottingham City Council asked residents,  workers, visitors, 
businesses and other organisations for their views on Nottingham’s 
ambition of sustainable carbon neutrality, and the actions to deliver 
this. The engagement work created conversations across the city 
around everyday topics related to s ustainability and climate 
change.     
The online survey at tracted 580 responses and over 3 00 people 
were consulted in person at many events across the city. A full 
summary of the feedback received is published separately, covering 
the actions people, and or ganisations, are already taking and want 
to take to meet the Action Plan’s aims. The consultation found a 
high level of support (9 out of 10 respondents) for the Council’s 
2028 ambition, as well as the objectives and suggested actions to 
get there. This va luable feedback has been used to strength 
citywide action and ensure that this 2028 Carbon Neutral Action 
Plan is one that puts citizens at its heart.    
Engagement is at the heart of the Action Plan and is fundamental to 
its success. Feedback from the cons ultation and ongoing 
engagement will feed into communications, actions and how we 
work. Engagement is also critical to delivering actions, so many of 
which are in partnership. This engagement work continues, both 
within the Council and across the city, hel ping make Nottingham a 
city of Climate Leaders. It is together that we can make Nottingham 
the UK's first carbon -neutral city, bringing benefits to the whole city 
for this, and future generations.   
 Governance, Funding & E ngagement  /11 
 
 
 
Monitoring Progress  
The UK Government department BEIS (Department for Business, 
Energy & Industrial Strategy) annually release each summer local 
authority carbon emissions.  
Each year, Nottingham city’s emissions will be assessed against 
the pathways outlined in the Carbon Neutral Charter to measure 
progress t owards achieving carbon neutrality in 2028.   
At the end of each financial year, the review of the action plan will 
inform an understanding of the anticipated carbon saved. The 
related year’s carbon emissions will not be published by BEIS until two years later due to the data lag (e.g. short term actions in 
2020/21 will not be in the released reported emissions until 2022).  
When the reports of these emissions are released, these will be 
reviewed to assess whether this is in line with the local acti ons 
undertaken and the anticipated impact.  
The BEIS data reports what are known as S cope 1 and 2 carbon 
dioxide emissions at local authority level. These local energy 
related emissions are what our target is focussed on.  
Nottingham City will report annual ly through the CDP climate and 
environmental reporting platform  for cities . This internationally 
recognised questionnaire  will help identify major risks, opportunities 
and sources of emissions that need to be accounted for. Annual 
submissions to CDP will a llow tracking of Nottingham’s progress, 
including identifying actions with the greatest impact, and 
benchmarking of Nottingham’s performance against other cities. 
This may also allow us to identify areas of opportunity for 
Nottingham in the future.  
The Cou ncil will have its own internal Carbon Management Plan , 
which will  include all key greenhouse gases, not just CO 2 and report  
on the City Council’s s cope 3 emissions , which are from wider 
services, procurement and functions . This will be measure d and 
progre ss reported  against the carbon management plan , annually.  
Nottingham City Council’s Plan 2019 -2023 includes the pledge 
‘Become the first carbon neutral city in the country, reaching this 
target by 2028’.  Progress towards this pledge, including annual 
miles tones and the carbon neutral pathway targets, will be reported 
quarterly as part of the Council’s corporate reporting.   
Working Together  /12 
 
Working Together  
Partner Organisations  
Key to becoming carbon neutral by 2028 will be all people, 
businesses and organisations in the city working effectively and in 
harmony with each other. Each business or organisation can 
succeed with certain things alone but the greatest impact will come 
from working together across all sectors.  
We have identified some of the key partners to help shape and 
deliver activities in Nottingham, including, but not limited to the One 
Nottingham Green Partnership and following organisations:  
 Local authorities, incl uding Police and Fire services  
 National Health Service  
 Private businesses including utility providers, Small & 
Medium -sized Enterprises (SMEs) and multi -nationals  
 Voluntary and charity sector  
 Civil Service e.g. Her Majesty’s Revenues & Customs 
(HMRC)  
 Centr al Government.  
 Research partnerships with both Nottingham universities and 
wider national and international research organisations  What b usinesses  and other organisations  can d o 
Businesses, charities and other ventures in the centre have a 
critical role in  transforming Nottingham into a sustainable city. How 
they operate, how staff get to work, what they buy, what they 
provide  or make . Many organisations are taking great steps forward 
to support sustainable carbon reduction.  There are many benefits to 
takin g action, such as reducing costs, accessing or attracting new 
customers and increasing productivity.  The consultation responses 
show some of the main ways local organisations are acting already : 
 Energy conservation initiatives (75%)  
 Corporate/board commit ment to sustainability (75%)  
 Company travel plan encourage public transport, walking, 
cycling (71.4%)  
Some of the  other ways organisations take action are : 
 Signing -up to the forthcoming Council Business Charter  
 Allowing more flexible working and online meetings for staff 
where possible to reduce travel  
 Making buildings energy efficient to cut costs and carbon, and 
to provide a more productive space for staff  
 Reducing  water usage through behaviour change and simple 
interventions  
 Creating wildlife friendly  green space  wherever possible  
 Monitor ing and measuring energy usage and  carbon 
emissions  
 Supporting local and sustainable procurement and production  Working Together  /13 
 
Investors  
Many of the projects and schemes to create a resilient and carbon 
neutral Nottingham will be low or no -cost, such as a behavioural 
change. Most will create a range of social, environmental and 
economic benefits.  The city will embrace new business models  and 
ways of working  to ensure everyone can benefit from the 
opportunities.  
However, many will require significant investment and funding, 
particularly in new or improved infrastructure to achieve their aims. 
There is strong evidence that investment in infr astructure and the 
development of new products and services creates significant local 
value and good returns for investors.  
A carbon neutral Nottingham will present many exciting 
opportunities for equity investors in sustainable solutions and so 
attractin g and involving suitable investors in the projects will be key.  
Working with Communities  
Working effectively with , and in , Nottingham’s local communities 
and neighbourhoods will be vital. Communities will be engaged in 
projects’ design and implementation throughout in order to create 
genuinely sustainable solutions. Improving a community’s green 
space, for example, can only be sustainable if local citizens feel a 
sense of ownership, empowerment and are able to realise its 
benefits long into the future.  Wha t citizens can do  
Becoming a sustainable carbon neutral city is something that 
requires everyone to take action and already citizens across 
Nottingham  are taking positive steps in their lives. Each step 
forward is one worth taking, no matter how small it m ay seem. 
Everyone is in different circumstances, but we can all do something , 
not just as individuals but as neighbours, friends and communities.  
Many of the steps help save money and improve our wellbeing. 
Citizens who responded to the 2028 consultation  have are 
contributing  towards  tackling the climate and ecological emergency 
by: 
 Recycling (98.4%)  
 Saving  energy (88.2%)  
 Growing Plants at home (77.3%)  
This is a great start and there  are many other ways we can all 
reduce  our own emissions, including : 
 Walk or cycle more than once a week, instead of using the 
car 
 Take shorter showers  
 Fix, reuse and share goods  
 Use a renewable energy tariff  
 Buy more local and sustainable food and drink  
 Lease,  share or own an electric car or bike  
 Use home or community compos ting 
 Section One – Carbon Reduction Chapters  /14 
 
Section One – Carbon Reduction Chapters  
 
In order to effectively group the activities 
needed to become carbon neutral by 2028, 
five key groups  or chapters  have been 
identified  and created over the following 
pages.  
Each chapter  contain s an introduction on the 
key associated issues and current activities, 
a series of key objectives with a range of 
actions which will deliver the objective  and 
thus the necessary change  by 2028.  
  1. Transport  
In 2017, nearly a third of Nottingham’s total 
CO2 emissions  came from transport  of 
which, nearly all come as a result of road 
transport from cars, vans, lorries and 
buses .  
Action is needed to reduce car journeys, 
increase cycling and walking, improve  
public transp ort and more low emission 
vehicles.  Through this, we can achieve 
better air quality, mobility and health for 
citizens.    2. The B uilt Environment  
In the coming decade, Nottingham will have 
to improve the efficiency of all buildings to 
reduce the demand for  energy.  
We will need to heat our buildings with low 
carbon and/or renewable heating, change 
our behaviours towards energy reduction 
and increase the adoption of energy 
efficiency technologies in both commercial 
and domestic buildings.   
     
3. Energy Generation  
Nottingham has been active in helping to 
decarbonise electricity. For instance, by 
March 2019, over 6,200 solar photov oltaic 
(PV) installations had been deployed 
across the city.  
We will need to take action to significantly 
expand local low carbo n sources of energy 
with the capacity to store energy  within the 
city and to be recognised as a test bed for 
new energy generating technologies . 
  
 
  4. Waste & Water 
In 2018 -19, 113,000 tonnes of household 
waste was produced  by Nottingham, of 
which 26.5% was reused, recycled or 
composted, 64.5% was sent for energy 
recovery; and 7.0% was sent for landfill.  
Actions are needed to reduce the volume 
of all waste and eliminate it from landfill, 
increase the reuse and recycling of w aste, 
and use the rest  for energy . Water use 
must be managed effectively.  
  5. Consumption  
The goods we buy have many emissions in 
their manufactur ing and transport , often  
from around the world. Food and drink in 
particular has a big impact on wider and 
imported emissions , the wider environment 
and our use of finite resources .  
Areas for reducing emissions include 
reducing meat and dairy, reducing transport  
miles, and sourcing from less energy 
intensive forms of production.   /15 
 
1. Transport  2. The Built Environment  3. Energy Generation   4. Waste & Water  5. Consumption  
By reducing the need for 
travel and adopting more 
sustainable modes of 
transport the city can reduce 
the emissions from vehicle 
fuel consumption.  By improving the energy 
efficiency of the built 
environment the city can 
reduce electricity and gas 
consumption in domestic and 
commercial buildings.  Building on existing low 
carbon energy generation to 
support the transition through 
a new energy system  which 
will reduce the carbon impact 
of the electricity consumed in 
our homes and businesses.   Waste and water 
contribute to the overall 
emissions from businesses 
and households. Improving 
our waste and water 
management systems will 
help reduce this impact  
and be resilient.  Decarbonising the city and 
local economy will require 
changing what we 
consume , how we 
consume it  and how it is 
produced.  
2017 Scope 1 & 2 Emissions*   Scope 3 Emissions* 
  The target covers direct and indirect energy related 
CO 2 emissions, referred to as Scope 1 and 2. It 
does not cover Scope 3 or imported emissions. This 
is for several reasons, including:  
 Ability to monitor and measure effectively  
 Alignment with the local carbon budget model 
embedded  
 Ability to influence and sha pe sources of 
emissions directly . 
Some of these emissions may occur outside of the 
city boundary. As with the city target, the Council will 
consider wider embodied emissions in its internal 
policy to affect those emissions outside of the main 
target. The  City Council is also very much part of the 
city target, but the Council will address wider 
greenhouse gases in the form of a CO 2e target for 
scope 1 and 2 (and scope 3 where possible) 
emissions for our estate, consumption, travel and 
services.  
 Electricity
Gas
Intallations
Other Fuels
Agriculture
Electricity
GasOther FuelsA RoadsMotorwaysMinor RoadsRailOther TransportIndustry and 
Commercial 
T otal
35%
Domestic T otal
35%Transport T otal
30% 
 
Transport  
 
Carbon Neutral Nottingham  Chapter One: Transport  /17 
 
Chapter One : Transport  
Transport emissions contributed 357 thousand tonnes of CO 2 in 
2017, 30.5% of Nottingham’s total CO 2 emissions. 98% of these 
emissions come as a result of road transport on ‘minor’ and ‘A’ 
roads from cars, vans,  lorries and buses for  example.  
Since 2005, there has been a 13.3% decrease in transport 
emissions across the city. However,  during this same period there 
has only been a slight decrease in the number of vehicle miles 
travelled by cars and taxis . Until recently, concentrations of the air 
pollutant NO2, emitted mainly by diesel vehicles, were above limits 
set to protect public health.    
The implementation of the UK’s first Workplace Parking Levy and 
the construction of two new tram lines has led to 9.7 million 
additional  public transport journeys  each year . Efforts to increase 
the uptake of Ultra Low Emissions Vehicles (ULEVs) are now 
beginning to show results however , ULEVs currently account for 
only less than 0.5% of all Nottingham’s vehicles.  To achieve the 
2028 carbon neutrality ambition, it will be necessary to almost 
entirely replace existing fossil -fuel based Internal Combustion 
Engine (ICE) vehicles  with ULEVs . Recent research suggests that 
the lifetime carbon emissions of ULEVs are half those  of a 
conventional vehicle, with more efficient electric vehicles saving the 
equivalent  carbon produced in the batteries in just two or three 
years.   
There are still considerable numbers of people who commute into 
Nottingham by means of single occupancy ca r journeys . This is one of the key areas of emissions that the Council will need to address 
alongside  businesses, communities and partner , shifting this 
behaviour towards shared and public transport, and much greater 
walking and cycling.  
Nottingham City Co uncil has historically pursued policies that 
encourage the use of public transport tog ether with walking and 
cycling, for example the Workplace Parking Levy , as well 
investment in a high quality, high frequency public transport  
network. These policies hav e resulted in a rising number of people 
using public transport and despite a rising population,  traffic 
volumes in Nottingham have remained static for several years.  
Current activities, actions and programmes  
 Workplace Parking Levy (WPL)  
 Tram extension  
 Integrated public transport – investment in biogas and electric 
bus fleet  
 Personal  journey planning and seed funding for shared 
transport solutions  
 Hackney and private hire vehicle strategy  
 Decarbonisation of Nottingham City Council owned fleet  
 Go Ultra Lo w Nottingham – building charging infrastructure for 
electric vehicles . Chapter One: T ransport  /18 
 
Objectives  
This can be achieved by:  
 Reducing the need to travel within the City  
 Encouraging  and enabling  more walking and cycling  
 Improving the quality and availability of low carbon public 
transport  
 Reducing  the impact of freight moving around the city  
 Improving our traffic demand management  
 Improve low carbon transport infrastructure  
 Moving  away from inter nal combustion powered vehicles to 
ULEV  such as electric or hydrogen vehicles . 
Opportunities and Benefits  
The steps taken towards low carbon transport will have broader 
positive impacts within the City. These will include:  
 Improving air quality  
 Creating m ore vehicle free public spaces to enjoy  
 Making cycling safer  and active healthier lifestyles easier  
 Making it cheaper and quicker for everyone to get around . 
  
 
 
 
 Case Study: Workplace Parking Levy  
The Workplace Parking Levy (WPL) was introduced into 
Nottingham in 2012. It is a charge payable by employers 
whose work premises have more than 10 emp loyee parking 
spaces.  
The revenue generated is ring fenced for local transport 
improvements. The WPL has helped to fund the construction 
of two new tramlines, the redevelopment of Nottingham 
Station and supports a network of electric buses.  
As well as ac ting as a demand management tool, the WPL 
also makes grants available to employers for infrastructure to 
encourage the use of sustainable travel. Grants to employers 
have included shower and locker facilities for cyclists as well 
as secure cycle parking.  
Independent academic research concluded the introduction of 
the WPL has had a positive impact on congestion and thus air 
quality and carbon emissions.  Chapter One: Transport  /19 
 
Actions  
Objective  Action  Timescale  
1.1 Reduced need to 
travel, particularly by car, 
within the city 
boundaries  Actions Nottingham City Council  can take  
1.1.1  The Council and Nottingham City Homes c ontinue to set an example through implementing smarter working practices and further e ncourage 
employers to implement home working  or smarter working  initiatives  in order to reduce employees’ travel time and distance travelled  Ongoing  
1.1.2 Encourage employers to  use shared hubs and new technology which will reduce  the need to travel,  such as video conferencing and cloud services  Medium Term 
1.1.3 Continue to ensure that new developments promote walking and are  within easy reach of high quality pubic transport  and within easy reach of hig h 
quality Cycle Network routes , such as through the Local Plan which allocates the most sustainable locations for development in order to reduce the need 
to travel  Ongoing  
Actions we can take in partnership  
1.1.4 Work with partners across D2N2 to offer greater connectivity over the region  Medium Term 
1.1.5 Nottingham City Council will continue to work with voluntary  sector organisations to encourage the shift away from the use of the private cars  Ongoing  
How Central Government can help  
1.1.6 Consider using fiscal policy to incentivise  home working    
1.1.7 Double the proportion of D epartment for Transport  capital funding delegated to Local Authorities    
1.1.8 Review vehicle excise duty in order to encourage a switch to sustainable forms of transport   
1.2 Increased uptake of 
active travel and 
availability of safe and 
green walking/ cycle 
networks  Actions Nottingham City Council  can take  
1.2.1 Develop and publish a Local Cycling and Walking Infrastructure Plan (LCWIP) for the D2N2 area  with Local Enterprise Partnership support  Medium Term 
1.2.2 Prioritise the development of a high quality cycling network and secure cycle parking in Nottingham and beyond  Medium Term 
1.2.3 Seek to secure ongoing funding  to support education , co-design  and engagement  to help commuters and visitors feel safe to make the switch to 
walking and c ycling     Ongoing  
Actions we can take in partnership  
1.2.4 Work  with schools and employers to encourage pupils,  parents , and employees to travel by walking and cycling where possible . Car Free Days, 
Clean Air Days and other events will promote the benefits of walking and cycling, in conjunction with communities and voluntary organisations.  Short  Term 
1.2.5 Through the workplace travel grant, the City Council will continue to  provide grants for employers to encourage their employee s to commute to work 
by cycling  Ongoing  
1.2.6 Expand the local and national  cycle netw orks in partnership with voluntary s ector organisation s  Medium Term Chapter One: Transport  /20 
 
Objective  Action  Timescale  
How Central Government can help  
1.2.7 Department for Transport  will be consulted on the local cycling and walking infrastructure plans  and asked to support its recommendations    
1.2.8 Provide support for investment into cycling and walking infrastructure  and complementary promotional  activities (e.g. encourage people to  walk/cycle 
for short journeys  and review signage of active travel routes)   
 
1.3 Increase in the 
quality, accessibility and 
frequency of public 
transport for all  
 Actions Nottingham City Council  can take  
1.3.1 Continue to promote the use of the most sustainable forms of public transport in the city, demonstrate value for money  and journey time savings  Ongoing  
1.3.2 Actively seek to expand the tram network  to cover more of the city and  conurbation of Nottingham bringing High Quality high frequency public 
transport to more of the population of Nottingham   Long Term 
1.3.3 The Council will commit to investing in Real Time Public Transport information through on street variable message signs  and mobile devices  Medium Term 
1.3.4 Continue to run the link bus network using 100% electric buses linking key points  to areas not served by the commercial network   Ongoing  
1.3.5 Improve bus infrastructure and priority measures e.g. bus lanes, high quality bus stops and new technologies   Medium Term 
Actions we can take  in partnership  
1.3.6 Expand Public Transport networks  in partnership with public transport operators  and large employers e.g. hospitals  Medium Term  
1.3.7 Work with  drivers and  operators to ensure that we have a cleaner hackney carriage and private hire fleet  by 2025 Medium Term 
1.3.8 Develop a Mobility As A Service platform  in partnership with public transport operators  and service providers of shared transport solutions such as 
car clubs  and bike hire  Medium Term 
1.3.9 The city council will continue to invest in ticketing integration rolling out new ways to pay for Public Transport E.g.  by using mobile devices bank cards 
and contactless payment systems  and developing mobility credits packages  for low income households  Ongoing  
How Central Government can help  
1.3.10 Central Government can help  with the electrification  of the Midland Mainline rail li nk into Nottingham and enable  more accessible , affordable and 
frequent services   
1.3.11 Provide support for investment into public transport    
 
1.4 A clean system for 
freight to enter and  
move around the city  
 Actions Nottingham City Council  can take  
1.4.1 Investigate the possibility of freight consolidation centres in the city to r educe freight journeys by road  Short Term 
1.4.2 The City Centre Clear Zone will be modified to ensure that only the cleanest delivery vehicles will be able to access t he city centre   Medium Term 
1.4.3 Encourage freight organisations to make t he switch to electric vehicles  and promote the use of cargo -bikes for final stage deliveries  Medium Term 
Actions we can take in partnership  Chapter One: Transport  /21 
 
Objective  Action  Timescale  
1.4.4 Inv estigate the potential for extra -urban  freight consolidation centres - transfer to electric freight vehicle into the city  Short Term 
1.4.5 Investigate the use of drones and other alternative technologies  for smaller deliveries   Short Term 
1.4.6 Encourage  the transport of goods and freight onto rail    Medium Term 
How Central Government can help  
1.4.7 Review v ehicle regulations particularly looking at refrigeration in transport an d how this can be made cleaner   
1.4.8 Provide legislative support for alternative delivery systems e.g . drones   
1.5 Reduced and better 
managed demand of 
traffic on the City’s 
streets  Actions Nottingham City Council can take  
1.5.1 Understand impacts of road user and congestion charging. For example, emissions -based Parking Tariff Policy – for public and internal NCC 
parking charges, occupancy -based parking signposting, reviewing all WPL scheme exemptions and discounts  Medium Term  
1.5.2 Promote the park and ride facilitates and investigate expan sion to other areas of the city and county  Medium Term  
 
1.6 High quality 
infrastructure across the 
city to enable low 
emission and low carbon 
transport  
 Actions Nottingham City Council  can take  
1.6.1 Expand  the D2N2  electric vehicle charging network across the region    Medium Term 
1.6.2 Introduce Vehicle to grid (V2G)  in order to help deal with peaks in energy demand    Short Term 
1.6.3 Deploy integrated on and off-street  vehicle charging infrastructure in NCC operated car parks  Short Term 
1.6.4 Develop a ULEV procurement framework  Medium Term  
1.6.5 Introduce incentives for  residents and  businesses to make the switch t o ultra-low emission vehicles.  e.g. helping taxi drivers with licensing costs for 
new EV’s and try before you buy schemes   Medium Term 
Actions we can  take in partnership  
1.6.6 Local Enterprise Partnership will play a role in linking the network of vehicle charge points across the region.  (Public and HGV)  and understanding 
and coordinating the potential role and requirements of hydrogen as a transport fuel  Ongoing  
1.6.7 Work with the local DNO, Western Power Distribution, to address power supply constraints in parts of the city   Medium Term 
1.6.8 Explore opportunities for maximising the potential for transport along the river and canal network  Medium Term  
How Central Government can help  
1.6.9 Continue to provide funding for local authorities to implement measures that support their Road to Zero Strategy ambitions    
1.6.10  Implement green number plate changes so that zero emission vehicles can more clearly be identified    Chapter One: Transport  /22 
 
Objective  Action  Timescale  
1.6.11 Provide clear and coordinated communications campaigns to help raise public awareness , alongside providing incentives to switch the ULEV 
vehicles  to aid the switch from petrol/diesel vehicles.     
1.6.12  Invest in more research in  innovative on street charging solutions     
1.6.13  Introduce changes in planning policies for electric vehicle charge points in new developments    
1.6.14  Change  Ofgem  rules to enable proactive investment into power supply where it is needed    
1.6.15  Require charge point suppliers to provide contactless payment options and support interoperability (roaming) across networks (powers under the 
Autonomous Vehicles Bill)    
1.7 Shift to ULEVS and 
Investigate additional 
demand management 
measures encouraging 
shared travel and 
introduce new 
technology solutions  
 Actions Nottingham City Council can take  
1.7.1 Introduce and expand a high quality electric vehicle charging network across the region    Medium Term  
1.7.2 Introduce new technology  and use smart cities developments to improve  the efficiency of the transport network   Medium Term  
1.7.3 NCC to open Nottingham Electric Vehicle Services (NEVS) to help Establish a network of ULEV maintenance workshops  Short Term  
1.7.4 Transition NCC and Nottingham City Homes operational and grey fleet to ULEV  Medium Term  
1.7.5 Develop local electric car club/car sharing schemes a nd investigate applications/ communications to support greater uptake  Short Term  
Actions we can take in partnership  
1.7.6 Working with Universities to identify opportunities for research into clean transport technology    Short Term  
1.7.7 Mobility as a service will become an increasingly important  part of the way people travel the city council will work with transport operators to ensure 
this happens in order to provide a viable alternative to car travel   Medium Term  
1.7.8 Work with city employers on making changes to their fleet, travel plans and ways to help employees switch to ULEVs and ebikes for personal use  Medium Term  
1.7.9 Work with key public sector organisations, for example hospitals, to investigate demand and capacity for accommodating greater numbers of ULEVs  Medium Term  
  
The Built Environment  
 Chapter Two: The B uilt Environment  /24 
 
Chapter  Two: The Built E nvironment  
Space heating is the largest contributor to domestic CO 2 emissions  
(25% of city’s overall emissions) , with 294,000 tonnes of CO 2 
emitted for heating and hot water by properties in Nottingham. This 
demonstrates that the need for  a transformation in the way we heat 
our homes, with 84% of households currently heated by  gas, 
towards low carbon electric  heat pumps and heat networks .  
From 2005 t o 2016, industry and commercial energy demand 
decreased by 35.5% and domestic by 26.3%. Though 
industry/commercial and domestic sector energy demand is 
decreasing, their gas use accounts for almost half of total energy 
consumption in Nottingham.  
Space and  process heating contributed appro ximately 30% of the 
City’s NOx  concentrations.  In the coming decade, Nottingham will 
have to reduce gas consumption, and replace its usage with lower 
carbon alternatives, as well as improve the efficiency of products, 
buildings and vehicles to reduce the demand for energy.  
Nottingham’s current housing stock poses a key challenge. There 
are 135,000 homes in Nottingham  (27,000 managed  by Nottingham 
City Homes ). Many of these  were built pre -1980 and over 58.2% 
are below an EP C rating of C, which is the national target for all 
homes to be at by 2030.  The Domestic Energy Efficiency and Fuel 
Poverty Subgroup (DEEFP) created the 2018 Fuel Poverty S trategy 
to tackle this challenge  in a low carbon and sustainable approach , 
with the aim of providing  affordable warmth and healthy homes for 
all citizens.   Significant improvements must be made to Nottingham’s houses , 
requir ing a sustained level of household retrofits. In addition, there 
will be an estimated 9,400 new build hom es by 2028, which should 
be built to th e highest possible standards,  be climate smart in their 
design  and affordable to run . There is an opportunity to use work on 
NCH properties to create improvements in private sector housing . 
Nottingham’s non -domestic p ropert ies also poses a challenge with 
69% of the 8480 non -domestic properties below an EPC rating of C.  
Significant new developments at the Boots site, Southside and 
Eastside Regenerations Zones, and the Eastcroft area of the 
Waterside Regeneration Zone, provide an opportunity to create 
more energy efficient and climate smart housing and commercial 
premises.  
Current activities, actions and programmes  
 Over 40,000 energy efficiency measures in local homes  
 Nottingham City Homes have installed 14,221 boilers,  4140 
loft installations and 12,588 cavity wall measures  
 A project called REMOURBAN has involved treating over 400 
homes with energy saving measures to make them warmer 
and reduced energy bills  
 Delivered efficiencies within the District Heating Scheme 
network to enable new connections to take place  Chapter Two: The Built Environment  /25 
 
 UK’s first Energiesprong retrofit on 27 homes, upgrading them 
with new outside walls and windows, a solar roof, and a state 
of the art heating system extending the District Hea ting 
Scheme .  
Objectives  
Reducing carbon emissions and energy demand from the built 
environment can be achieved by:  
 Heat ing our buildings with low carbon and/or renewable 
heating  and changing  behaviours to wards energy 
consumption   
 Monitor ing and e ncouraging  energy efficiency standards and 
improvements  
 Increasing  the adoption of energy efficiency technologies and 
low-cost solutions in both commercial and domestic  buildings  
 Minimising  emissions in construction of new buildings and 
through procurement  of technologies and materials . 
 Opportunities and Benefits  
 Reducing energy bills for residents and local businesses  
 Upgrading the quality of housing stock , making homes 
healthier  and creating new sustainable homes  
 Improving the quality of commercial premises , helping make 
more productive and better working environments  
 Improving air quality by reducing emissions  of NOx  from gas 
boilers.  
 Creating new skilled employment and commercial 
opportunities within the sustainable construction sector .  
 
Case Stud y: Energiesprong  
Winner of a national innovation award, the first pilot project for 
Nottingham City Homes (the ALMO managing and maintaining 
Nottingham’s council housing) completed in early 2018 radically 
transformed ten social rent homes in Sneinton (seve n terraced 
three -storey houses and three bungalows)  It delivered  super 
insulated, low maintenance  and almost net zero energy homes.  
This project was the first in the UK to pioneer the Dutch 
‘Energiesprong’  (energy leap) initiative, which has radically  
upgraded the energy efficiency of  thousands of homes in the 
Netherlands.   
New wall panels were prefabricated  off-site and arrived in ‘full 
storey heights’  complete with ample insulation and a  durable board 
finish ready to crane into  place. The radical retrofit was completed  
in less than one week with occupants  able to remain in residence 
throughout  the works. Tenants report warmer homes , cheaper 
bills, and the exteriors look  fantastic and have really enhanced the  
neighbourhood.  This p roject is now being rolled out to many more 
homes across the city.  Chapter Two: The Built Environment  /26 
 
Actions  
Objective   Action   Timescale   
2.1 Have all heating from low carbon 
and/or renewable heating sources  
 Actions Nottingham City Council  can take  
2.1.1 Provide information and materials to educate and engage citizens and businesses with low carbon sources of heating  Short Term  
2.1.2 Investigate the requirements for large scale installation of low carbon sources of heating (air/ground/water source hea t 
pumps), using council owned homes as a test bed in partnership with Nottingham City Homes, grid operators and supply 
chains  Short Term  
2.1.3 Promote incentives for low carbon heating such as the Renewable Heat Incentive (RHI) and investigate  additional 
finances/funding opportunities for low carbon heating, including Heat or Energy as a Service models  Short Term  
2.1.4 Expand on D2Grids project exploration of mine -water for heat  Short Term  
2.1.5 Undertake heat mapping exercises for ground, water, air, waste heat and other sources for low carbon heating , 
considering locally appropriate scale of infrastructure, for example communal networks  Short Term  
Actions we can take in partnership  
2.1.6 Investigate approaches for local low carbon heating provision to domestic and commercial customers, attracting 
investment and supporting the local economy with commercial opportunities  Short Term  
2.2 Enforce regulations effectively to 
monitor and encourage energy efficiency 
standards and improvements  Actions Nottingham City Council  can take  
2.2.1. Enforce private rented and non -domestic Minimum Energy Efficiency Standards regulations  Short Term  
2.2.2 Review and evaluate the potential of an offset fund (106 agreements) or allowable solutions mechanism for 
developers to pay into when a certain high level of energy efficiency of buildings is not able to be met in the development 
and use this money for carbon saving projects  Short Term  
2.2.3 Expand planning policy to progress a Carbon  Neutral Supplementary Planning Document to expand on a range of 
actions developers can consider/incorporate into development plans to reduce their carbon impact (covering building 
materials, design and orientation, natural ventilation  and lighting , landsc aping and off -setting). This may include the 
requirement of a Carbon Statement to be submitted as part of the Development Management process.  Short Term  
2.2.4 Investigate setting up a pre -application advice service in regards to carbon statements for future developments (which 
may be required under new Carbon Neutral Supplementary Planning Documents)  Short Term  
2.2.5 Implement compliance in existing core strategy policies for all new development proposals, where they will be 
expected to comply with n ational and local targets unless it can be demonstrated that compliance with the policy is not 
viable or feasible  Medium Term  
2.2.6 Stay up to date with government policies that may help shape and enforce energy efficiency improvements in 
buildings  Ongoing  
2.2.7 Promote awareness and understanding of Energy Performance Certificate for domestic and commercial properties to 
foster greater action in the city.  Ongoing  
Actions we can take in partnership  
2.2.8  Stay up to date and help promote an emerging Carbon Neutral Supplementary Planning Document which may require 
developers to produce carbon statement  Ongoing  
2.2.9  Support the launch of Co -Place, a partnership between community organisations and NCC to provide training and 
support for designers, developers, officers and communities to engage in collaborative planning processes, working 
together in co -design and plac e making schemes.  Ongoing  Chapter Two: The Built Environment  /27 
 
Objective   Action   Timescale   
How Central Government can help  
2.2.10 Look to implement support and regulations to set a high level of energy efficiency in buildings as standard   
2.3 Have greater and more frequent 
citywide uptake of energy efficiency 
technologies both commercial and 
domestic  
 
 Actions Nottingham City Council  can take   
2.3.1 Look to increase the number of EnergieSprong Household retrofits in partnership with N ottingham City Homes in line 
with available Government fund ing Short Term  
2.3.2 Investigate the potential for and funding sources to develop our approach to affordable net zero energy retrofits  Medium Term  
2.3.3 Contribute to making household retrofits commercially viable through creating local sites for retrofit material and 
ensuring sufficient skills and infrastructure is in place, as well as attracting investment in future retrofit measures  Ongoing  
2.3.4 Capitalise on available funding and expand Energy Company Obligation (ECO) measures where appropriate  Medium Term  
2.3.5 Find ways to address over 50,000 solid wall or inadequately insulated properties across the city  Long Term  
2.3.6 Continue to lead by example through regenerating areas of the city with more energy efficient and climate smart 
buildings e.g. Watersid e – Trent Basin  Medium Term  
2.3.7 Seek to prioritise building new builds on council land to a high energy efficiency (e.g. Passivhaus Standard / AECB 
Standard), including NCH properties, ensuring they are built to a ‘carbon neutral’ standard  Ongoing  
2.3.8 Investigate the implementation of a set carbon intensity for construction of new council buildings (e.g. KgCO 2e/m2) Short Term  
2.3.9 Continue to develop Council strategies to help influence and shape the movement towards improved energy efficiency 
within the built environment (e.g. Housing Strategy)  Ongoing  
2.3.10 Ensure the Council’s own estate’s energy efficiency is maximised through invest to save practices, such as using 
SALIX financing  Ongoing  
Actions we can take in partnership  
2.3.11 Engage and collaborate with large public and private sector organisations to improve the energy efficiency of their 
buildings  Long Term  
2.3.12  Work with partners to support citizens and businesses to understand the case and means for installing different low -
carbon technologies.  Medium Term  
2.3.13  Explore the possibility of trusted vendor approaches and frameworks for suppliers to domestic and  commercial 
customers  Medium Term  
2.4 To help businesses and citizens 
reduce energy demand from buildings  
 Actions Nottingham City Council  can take  
2.4.1 Inform citizens and businesses across the city on energy saving measures through developing  materials and 
engagement  i.e. local pop -stalls, with the aim to also reduce fuel poverty.  Short Term  
2.4.2 Provide information and engage with citizens and organisations to encourage switching to renewable energy tariffs, 
for example via Robin Hood Energy  Ongoing  
Actions we can take in partnership   
2.4.3 Explore the potential to empower action through gamification  Short Term  
2.4.4 Work with key partners to use procurement  approaches to encourage suppliers to report on their operational 
emissions, and look to establish a public -facing citywide energy and carbon ratings scheme for businesses  Medium Term  
2.5 Maximise the uptake of low -cost 
technologies to reduce the demand f or 
energy across all buildings  Actions Nottingham City Council  can take  
2.5.1 Ensure low cost technologies such as LED lighting are rolled out  across the council estate, including parks and open 
spaces, as well as included in new developments, to reduce energy use.  
 
 Ongoing  Chapter Two: The Built Environment  /28 
 
Objective   Action   Timescale   
Actions we can take in partnership   
2.5.2 Work with businesses and citizens across Nottingham by providing information  and advice on low -cost technologies to 
reduce energy consumption in buildings (e.g. through web materials. pop -up question information stands, hosting 
engagement events or supplying leaflets).  Ongoing  
2.6 Minimise emissions in construction 
of new buildings and through 
procurement  
 Actions Nottingham City Council  can take  
2.6.1 Trial the open -source Embodied Carbon in Construction Calculator (“EC3”) tool  Short Term  
2.6.2 Investigate available tools to incorporate whole -life costing into procurement process with support from finance  Short Term  
2.6.3 Include carbon reduction into procurement specification and set appropriate minimum standards  Short Term  
2.6.4 Meas ure Scope 3 emissions impacts of current construction approaches and procurement  Medium Term  
2.6.5 Promote more sustainable materials for new constructions based on the BREEAM tool  Short Term  
Actions we can take in partnership  
2.6.6 Develop and support, with NCH, localised offsite manufacturing for new build and retrofit  Medium Term  
2.6.7 Influence regional procurement frameworks  Medium Term  
2.6.8 Undertake research with partners to facilitate a local circular economy for material reuse in construction to reduce 
emissions, costs and improve sustainability  Medium Term  
 
 
Energy Generation  
 
Carbon Neutral Nottingham  Chapter Three: Energy Generation  /30 
 
Chapter  Three : Energy Generation  
The vision of a carbon neutral Nottingham requires producing more 
renewable and low carbon energy locally in addition to reducing the 
overall amount of energy consumed.  Storing energy locally and 
managing our energy in a smarter and timelier way will be es sential . 
This can reduce the peaks that make energy demand hard to cater 
for, and get more out of the renewable energy we produce, 
reducing bills and carbon.  
Since 2010, the UK electricity national grid has seen its CO 2e 
intensity figures  decrease  by 47%. These are expected to continue 
to decrease as the mix of electricity sources nationally become 
lower carbon, with increased generation from renewable sources 
such as wind and solar.  
Nottingham has been active in helping to decarbonise electricity . It 
is estimated a round a fifth of all local energy demand is provided 
from local low -carbon energy sources.  
As of  March 2019, over 6,200 solar PV installations had been 
deployed across the city, covering 4.5% of domestic properties, with 
an installed ca pacity of 21MW. Moving forward, Nottingham  will 
continue to increase its local renewable generation, with a particular 
focus on solar P hoto Voltaic (PV)  combined with energy storage.  
The City Council  will continue to participate and lead on innovative 
solutions to energy generation and look to have a range of sources 
in place including energy from waste, wind, sewage, water, land 
and movement.  Current activities, actions and programmes  
 An extensive heat network linked to Energy -from-Waste  
 Solar PV programme on City Council owned estate and on 
properties across the city  
 Nottingham has pioneered innovative approaches to 
renewables, such as solar carports, and working with partners 
to combine solar PV with domestic, community and 
commercial e nergy storage facilities . 
 Nottingham hosts the government ( BEIS ) funded Midlands 
Energy Hub to develop  local energy action, and is working 
with partners to support the D2N2 Energy Strategy.  
Objectives  
Decarbonising local energy generation can be achieved b y: 
 Have a vision of how the energy system would ideally look to 
align energy development and secure funding  
 Expand local low carbon sources of energy within the city  
 Improve the capacity to store local low carbon energy  
 Have a stable and secure energy sys tem that maximises 
energy from local diverse mix of low carbon sources  Chapter Three: Energy Generation  /31 
 
 Enable the city to be a test bed for new energy generating 
technologies  
 Ensure low carbon energy is affordable and accessible to all  
Opportunities and Benefits  
 Increased energy securi ty through local low carbon 
generation  
 Creating a global reputation as a leader in low carbon energy 
research and development  
 Attracting investment into the Cit y’s sustainable infrastructure  
 Reducing the cost of energy to local businesses and 
communities .  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Case Study: Harvey Hadden Solar  
Harvey Hadden leisure centre is a large site with available 
rooftop space and car parks making it an ideal site for solar 
energy generation. Energy Services have delivered two solar 
projects for the centre. A 200  kWp roof solar panel system 
and the UK’s first publicly -owned solar car park a 67 kWp 
system. These PV systems were installed without any 
disruption to the day -to-day running of the popular leisure 
centre. Since generation started , Harvey Hadden has 
regul arly benefited from 100% off -grid energy through the 
summer.  
Chapter Three: Energy Generation  /32 
 
Actions  
Objective   Action   Timescale   
3.1 Have a vision of how the 
energy system would ideally 
look to align energy 
development and secure 
funding  Actions Nottingham City Council  can take  
3.1.1 Align to smart city strategy and maximise the use of local generation through technology  Short Term  
3.1.2 Embed  decentralising energy generation and reducing carbon dioxide emissions  from energy in  existing core areas of compliance 
within planning policy  Ongoing  
3.1.3 Align F uture Parks Accelerator (FPA)  Parks and Heritage Strategy to 2050 to deliver aspects of the vision and attract funding as part 
of service redesign through the exploration of national and local policy and specialist consultant advice  Short Term  
3.1.4 Align to national objectives on c lean growth and decarbonisation   
Actions we can take in partnership   
3.1.5 Develop energy strategy and new citywide energy steering group  Short Term  
3.1.6 Create common and/or aligned energy plans with neighbouring local authorities and partners to create a joined up and consistent 
approach under the D2N2 Energy Strategy  Ongoing  
3.1.7 Support an active and visible community of energy discussion and working groups to tackle energy challenges collectivel y Medium Term  
3.1.8 Work with partners to understand the potential for low -carbon hydrogen gas in the distribution network for heating and hot water 
provision   
How Central Government can help  
3.1.9 Continue the devolve funding into local energy infrastructure and capacity building  Short Term  
3.2 Expand local low carbon 
sources of energy within the 
city 
 Actions N ottingham City Council  can take  
3.2.1 Installation of solar PV on all viable NCC  properties  and encourage uptake across the city  Medium  Term  
3.2.2 Perform a viability survey at all existing sites (structures under parks remit) to potentially accommodate further solar PV wherever 
possible with shared surplus income towards sustaining parks and open spaces.  Medium Term  
3.2.3 Investigate the potential for expanding the District Heat N etwork  and smaller neighbourhood district heating schemes  Ongoing  
3.2.4 Investigate mine water as a heat source  Ongoing  
Actions we can take in partnership  
3.2.5 Increase local renewable electricity generation  and map out the potential across buildings and sites , particularly in conjunction with 
research and other public sector partners  Ongoing  
3.2.6 Identify areas of the city that would not practically go onto the heat network and model potential technologies for exa mple heat 
pumps  Short Term  
3.2.7 Invest in low carbon generation assets within the D2N2  region  to increase regional manufacturing supply for local consumption  Medium Term  
3.2.8 E xplore the opportunities  for Anaerobic Digestion to produce clean energy  (e.g. electricity and biogas) , deal with waste, and produce 
resources  Medium Term  
3.2.9 Explore the potential for local water source heat pumps  Medium Term  
3.2.10 Through engagement with citizens and partners, develop information and guidance materials through different media to facilitate 
greater uptake of renewable energy generation  Short Term  
How Central Government can help  Chapter Three: Energy Generation  /33 
 
Objective   Action   Timescale   
3.2.11  Remove/refine current regulation which causes significant barriers in re -enforcing the network ahead of need and that current 
pricing rules (a ceiling on the amount companies can earn from charges to use the networks) set by Ofgem mean the end user ha s to 
meet the majority of these costs once a connection request comes in that tips the balance  Short Term  
3.2.12  Strategic investment by Government , and close working with the Distribution Network Operator (DNO),  is required in order to meet 
growing demands as new technology and green priorities mean more of a move to electricity  for transport and heating  Medium Term  
3.3 Improve the capacity to 
store local low carbon energy  Actions Nottingham City Council  can take  
3.3.1 Increase electricity storage on council properties to allow maximum use of locally generated energy  Ongoing  
3.3.2 Investigate the potential of Parks and Open Spaces sites for local storage  Medium Term  
Actions we can take in partnership   
3.3.3 Incre ase electricity storage locally, through communicating benefits, understanding financial and business cases  Medium Term  
3.3.4 Increase thermal storage (e.g. hot water and ground inter -seasonal storage ) for greater maximisation of local energy  generation  Medium Term  
3.3.5 Investigate the potential  of caves for energy storage  Long Term  
3.4 Have a stable and secure 
energy system that 
maximises energy from local 
diverse mix of low carbon 
sources  Actions Nottingham City Council  can take  
3.4.1 Improve the resilien ce and coordination  of the Council’s  energy system s to manage demand response  which is sensitive to weather 
conditions  and local energy needs  Long Term  
Actions we can take in partnership   
3.4.2 Create a roadmap and platform for private, municipal, co -operative and community developments to align in one energy system  Medium Term  
How Central Government can help   
3.4.3 Have a nationally smarter grid to make energy assets work together , with timely rollout and engagement for smart meters  Medium Term  
3.5 Enable the city to be a 
test bed for new energy 
generating technologies  Actions Nottingham City Council  can take  
3.5.1 Frame challenges in Innovation Gateway  to ensure difficult problems can be met with new solutions  Short Term  
3.5.2 Participate in Domestic Mission UKRI trial with carbon neutral challenges to SME market  Medium Term  
3.5.3 Living Lab development - New sustainability  and energy impact research initiatives  co-designed  with citizens and organisations in 
2020  Medium Term  
Actions we can take in partnership  
3.5.4 Innovative testbed city for new technologies e.g. micro -wind, fuel cell, pumped storage  Ongoing  
How Central Government can help:   
3.5.5 Provide nationally available funding to drive the national low carbon agenda at a city level which the City Council can access  Ongoing  
3.6 Ensure low carbon 
energy is affordable and 
accessible to all  Actions Nottingham City Council  can take:   
3.6.1 Reduce energy poverty with support from sister organisation Robin Hood Energy, Enviroenergy, Nottingham City Homes and 
Nottingham Energy Partnership  Ongoing  
Actions we can take in partnership  
3.6.2 Increase in community and cooperative energy projects in partnership with NCH  Medium Term  
3.6.3 Explore the potential for time of use tariffs and energy as a service model  Medium Term  
How Central Government can help:   
3.6.4 Enable access to appropriate nationally available funding, incentives and access to finance, to support affordable energy generation 
for all  Short Term   
Waste & Water  
 
Carbon Neutral Nottingham  Chapter Four: Waste and Water  /35 
 
Chapter  Four: Waste and Water  
In 2018 /19, 113,000 tonnes of household waste was produced  by 
Nottingham, of which 26.5% was reused, recycled or composted, 
64.5% was sent for energy recovery , and 7.0% was sent to landfill. 
Since 2016 -17, the mass of household waste re -used, recycled or 
composted has decreased by 10.6%, waste sent to landfill ov er the 
same time period has decreased by 19%, whilst waste sent for 
energy recovery has increased by 9%. Meanwhile, the overall total 
amount of household waste collected between 2016/17 and 
2018/19 has remained broadly consistent.  
As Nottingham transition s to a more sustainable society, the 
recycling rate will have to increase and landfill decrease even 
further, alongside a reduction in the total amount of household 
waste. This will require changes to processes and physical 
infrastructure, as well as city wide behavioural  changes to disposal, 
sharing, shopping and dietary habits.  
Current activities, actions and programmes  
 Work in partnership with FCC Environment to m anage the 
city’s Energy -from-Waste (EFW) facility at Eastcroft, which  
provides  steam for th e district heating network run by 
Enviro energy,  a company wholly owned by the City Council.  
 City Council are now self -billing for its own water supply  Objectives  
Reducing the harmful impacts of waste and water consumption can 
be achieved by:  
 Reducing  the total volume of waste  and eliminating  it from landfill  
 Reuse, reduce and recycle waste, use it for energy and 
eliminate it from landfill  
 Have better waste management and ownership through 
effective regulations and policy  
 Improve the efficiency of the water  supply and water 
treatment to reduce water demand  
 Improve behaviours to reduce water demand  
Opportunities and Benefits  
 Keeping the City clean and free from waste  
 Creating new business opportunities and sustainable 
employment in the circular economy  
 Reducing the cost of more sustainable waste disposal options 
to businesses and tax payers  
 Make  household savings , especially on food bills  
 Maintaining stability and security of water supply to the City.  Chapter Four: Waste and Water  /36 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Actions  
Objective   Action   Timescale   
4.1 Reduce the total volume 
of waste generated through 
the use of technological and 
behavioural changes  
 
 Actions Nottingham City Council  can take  
4.1.1 Engage the public, communities, schools and businesses through citywide behavioural change initiatives and information 
campaigns to provide a greater understanding of waste issues, where local waste goes and best practices to reduce the volume of was te 
and recycle correctly  Short Term  
4.1.2 Continue to promote initiatives to reduce waste across the city, such as Love Food, Hate Waste, #Refill and #Longliveth elunchbox 
campaigns, alongside increasing water fountains across the city to reduce single use plastic waste  Ongoing  
4.1.3 Explore developing repair and reuse facilities, workshops and skill sharing across the city – including Nottingham City Homes 
project to explore viability of reuse of unwanted but serviceable items  Short Term  
4.1.4 Continue to work towards the Council’s commitment to become single use plastic free by 2023  Medium Term  
4.1.5 Explore the opportunities of an initiative with social enterprises to tap into the funding to help change behaviours an d/or delivering 
fuel from  waste  Medium Term  
Actions we can take in partnership  
4.1.6 Work with research and industry partners to create innovative solutions for separating and using waste materials in con struction and 
infrastructure  Ongoing  
4.1.7 Develop citywide information  and engagement to support citizens and businesses with a transition to zero -waste approaches  Medium  Case Study: Low Temperature District 
Heating  
Nottingham City Homes (NCH) has invested in an innovative 
approach for social housing to supply heat and electricity 
generated from residual waste collected in Nottingham. Its 
primary motivation in this has been  improvement of tenant 
comfort and reduction of bills, while supporting the 2028 city 
ambition.  
Low temperature district heating (LTDH) allows heat generated 
from a wide range of renewable sources to be efficiently 
transmitted across the City. It can also  link to new energy 
storage technologies to provide stable supply of energy.  Chapter Four: Waste and Water  /37 
 
Objective   Action   Timescale   
4.2 Reuse, reduce and 
recycle waste, use it for 
energy and eliminate it from 
landfill  Actions Nottingham City Council  can take  
4.2.1 Investigate using food waste for anaerobic digestion to provide energy as an alternative to Eastcroft Energy from Waste and 
developing a plan for kerbside food collection in line with national strategy for 2023  Short Term  
4.2.2 Explore the potential to expand the District  Heating network to more properties across Nottingham, using more energy from energy -
from–waste plants  Medium Term  
4.2.3 Investigate ways to eliminate the remaining 7% of waste going to landfill  and implement into council policy  Long Term  
4.2.4 Conclude an investigation in to alternative ways of collecting and disposing recyclable materials from homes and busine sses, in 
order to maximise the quality and quantity of recyclable materials collected, in particular understanding the cost and ben efits of different 
options.  Short Term  
Actions we can take in partnership  
4.2.5 Encourage organisations and businesses across the city to use re -usable cups for staff, retail and events  Medium Term  
4.2.6 With partners, support and promote the development of repair cafes, centres and groups, including skills -share and swap shops  Short Term  
4.3 Have better waste 
management and ownership 
through effective regulations 
and policy  
 Actions Nottingham City Council can take  
4.3.1 Keep up to date with national policies on waste and seek to contribute and influence new waste regulations  Ongoing  
Actions we can take in partnership  
4.3.2 Investigate expanding waste collection services e.g. food collections   Short Term  
4.3.3 Progress the Joint Waste Local Plan with Nottinghamshire County Council  Short Term  
4.3.4 Keep up to date with national policies on waste and seek to contribute and influence new waste regulations  Ongoing  
4.3.5 Explore with partners the development of innovative evidence -based approaches to target and tailor recycling / waste management 
campaigns  Medium  
How Central Government can help  
4.3.6  Provide financial support to establishment of new waste system infrastructure and initiatives and provide clarity on future upstream 
and downstream waste arrangements to t ackle waste issues systemically, as outlined in the Resources and Waste Strategy for England 
2018   
4.4 Improve the efficiency of 
the water supply and water 
treatment to reduce water 
demand  
 Actions Nottingham  City Council  can take  
4.4.1 Investigate the potential to include technologies to improve water efficiency within buildings, such as rainwater harve sting, grey 
water systems, flow regulators, water efficient toilets and showerheads.   Short Term  
4.4.2 Carry out baselining exercise of potential sites with water leaks, and seek to undertake in -depth assessment of water leaks at those 
sites Short Term  
4.4.3 Continue to provide water to the Council’s estate through water self -supply, helping the council w ork towards more accurate billing 
and monitoring, helping to reduce water usage  Ongoing  
Actions we can take in partnership:   
4.4.4 Work with water supply companies to help identify water leaks across the city  Ongoing  
4.4.5 Work with Nottingham partners to understand how Green and Blue infrastructure can be better used to manage water  Short -term 
4.5 Improve behaviours to 
reduce water demand  Actions Nottingham City Council  can take:  
4.5.1 Provide information to citizens and businesses on the best practices to reduce water consumption, helping to improve 
understanding of the issues and solutions to better water management, reducing bills and carbon emissions  Short Term   
Consumption  
 
Carbon Neutral Nottingham  Chapter Five: Consumption  /39 
 
Chapter  Five: Consumption  
Our consumption of the planet’s resources is threatening the 
wellbei ng of future generations and limited  natural resources we 
depend upon. Our material footprint is rapidly outpacing population 
and economic growth. Evidence shows that our total environmen tal 
footprint is greater than what the planet can sustain, something 
known as ‘overshoot’. When you consider the non -local greenhouse 
gas emissions, around half of our footprint comes from what are 
called imported emissions – emissions in the things we buy  and 
consume.   
This includes everything from appliances, lightbulbs, phones and 
computers, to tyres, clothing, food and other household essentials. 
It is often hard to know the environmental, and indeed social, 
impact of these products due to the complex  and global, means of 
manufacturing and transporting them. As with reducing waste, there 
are a number of ways to address this: reducing non -essential 
consumption; reusing, repairing and sharing existing goods; finding 
local producers, and; using more ethical  or sustainable options.   
Increased transparency and better data in supply chains and 
production will empower individuals and businesses to make 
informed decisions with the knowledge of the impact of their 
purchases. This in turn can alter markets by chang ing demand and 
preferences, with the potential to increase local and/or sustainable 
production, providing additional social and economic benefits. 
Innovation can be utilised to help produce high -value, quality 
products that don’t cost the earth.   Food and drink in particular has a large and visible impact on the 
environment, and our greenhouse gas emissions – whether in 
production, consumption or disposal. This Plan addresses a range 
of key issues, including local food production, reducing food miles 
and ai r pollution. It also considers tackling food poverty, diet related 
ill health and access to affordable and sustainable healthy food. It is 
recognised that we have a role to play in a globalised world and to 
support the most sustainable approaches whether t hey are local, 
national or international.   
This is not just about changing our diets and our behaviours 
towards consumption. It is about creating a vibrant and diverse 
sustainable local and circular economy; building community 
knowledge, skills, resilience  and resources. It is vital that citizens 
and organisations are enabled and empowered to affect positive 
change and improve quality of life through their buying power.    
 Current activities, actions and programmes  
 Development of a sustainable f ood strategy  for Nottingham  
 Use of local suppliers by Catering Services to reduce food 
miles and reducing food waste in school  kitchens  
 Reducing single -use consumption products, particularly 
plastics  Chapter Five: Consumption  /40 
 
Objectives  
 Increase  local and low -carbon  production  
 Reduce the consumption of high carbon products   
 Reduce local waste and link all remaining  waste to energy, 
composting and a circular economy   
 Encourage more low carbon cooking and meals  
 Reduce the carbon emissions of city events and improve their 
sustainability  
 Devel op sustainable tourism  
 Buy and procure sustainably, and maximise existing 
resources   Opportunities and Benefits  
 Developing  a vibrant and diverse sustainable food economy  
 Build community knowledge, sharing, skills and  resources  
 Tackling food poverty and improve access to health affordable 
food 
 Improving diet -related ill -health . 
 Reduce the financial strain of consumpti on 
 
  Case Study: Nottingham Good Food 
Partnership  
In 2016, Nottingham Green Partnership supported a call from 
its food sub group members for The City of Nottingham to join 
the Sustainable Food Cities Network. Sustainable Food Cities 
Network, helps people and places to share challenges, 
explore practical s olutions and develop best practice in all 
aspects of sustainable food.  
The key themes of SFC were seen as the best route forward 
to join together and strengthen, the wealth of local food based 
activity taking place across the city and importantly, to learn  
from the success and experience of the SFC membership. 
SFC has over 50 members, including Good Food East 
Midlands, the first region to achieve network membership.  
SFC has now extended its work beyond the UK: Nottingham’s 
membership will provide the city w ith the opportunity to share 
its wealth of knowledge and food history with an international 
audience.  
Chapter Five: Consumption  /41 
 
Actions  
Objective   Action   Timescale   
5.1 Increase local and low -carbon 
production  
 Actions Nottingham City Council  can take  
5.1.1 Development of urban food strategy with Nottingham Good Food Partnership and other partners   Short Term  
5.1.2 Increase range of edible fruits, flowers and vegetables in Council owned parks, rooftops, and open spaces  Medium Term  
5.1.3 Reduce use of fertilizers by increased use of locally produced compost and local allotment growing  Medium Term  
5.1.4 Develop Nottingham’s Clean Growth economy through joined -up plans, strategies and programmes, aligned with 
regional and national strategies  Short Term  
5.1.5 Work with schools, universities, colleges and other institutions to encourage and support sustainable entrepreneurs  Short Term  
Actions we can take in partnership  
5.1.6 Increase local growing and food sharing through community gardens/hubs and explore the use of technology e.g. an 
app Short Term  
5.1.7  Develop a package (e.g. Salix) to improve the efficiency of schools’ catering equipment, and switch to electric sources 
to allow for carbon neutral catering  Medium Term  
5.1.8  Investigate developing a city -wide carbon neutral catering service that combines above elements with broader low -
carbon and energy offers for a whole systems approach  Medium Term  
5.1.9 Explore community -led local composting and vermiculture schemes for citizens and businesses  Medium Term  
5.1.10  Support the development of cooperative, community owned and other collaborative ventures to foster more effective 
use and sharing of resources  Medium Term  
5.1.11  Develop proposals for encouraging  and incubating  businesses  that can deliver low -carbon goods and services to 
develop in or relocate to Nottingham , and wider region - with the aim of growing the number of jobs and increasing local 
capacity to deliver carbon neutral programmes in the city, for example building retrofit  Medium Term  
5.2 Reduce consumption of high 
carbon products  
 Actions Nottingham City Council  can take  
5.2.1 Develop education and outreach programmes to reduce meat consumption/increase plant based diets within Catering 
Services  Short Term  
5.2.2 Create full greenhouse gas footprint for catering functions to identify biggest emissions areas  Short Term  
Actions we can take in partnership  
5.2.3 Work with partners to  reduce the carbon impact and overall sustainability of food choices, for example meat and dairy  Medium Term  
5.2.4 Explore carbon reduction opportunities in procurement, by getting suppliers to present lifecycle/carbon assessments 
and look to adopt appropriate standards  Short Term  
5.2.5 Ensure sustainable consumption campaigns and interventions are more effective through recognising and addressing 
existing inequalities  Ongoing  
5.3 Reduce local  waste and link all 
remaining waste to energy, composting 
and a circular economy  
 Actions Nottingham City Council  can take  
5.3.1 Reduce food waste at source and increase food waste recycling rate  Medium Term  
5.3.2 Investigate options for additional food waste collections in alignment with the national waste strategy  Short Term  
Actions we can take in partnership  
5.3.3 Explore the opportunity for commercial food waste collection and potential for Anaerobic Digestion  Medium Term  
5.3.4 Research a business plan to move towards a near -to closed -loop school catering service in which food waste can 
create compost (maybe power through AD eventually) to grow veg locally to put back into school meals  Short Term  Chapter Five: Consumption  /42 
 
Objective   Action   Timescale   
5.3.5 Enable more citizens and businesses to understand how to reduce their food waste through buying, storing, preparation 
and cooking  Short Term  
5.3.6 Work with local partners to support the  reduction of waste and to turn waste in to a resource in a circular economy  Medium Term  
5.4 Encourage more low carbon 
cooking and meals  Actions Nottingham City Council  can take  
5.4.1 Explore adoption of Green Kitchen Standard/ Food for Life  Short Term  
5.4.2 Introduce low carbon menus in City Council and partner catering facilities  Medium Term  
Actions  we can take in partnership  
5.4.3 Expand carbon neutral kitchen and refill campaign  Ongoing  
5.4.4 Explore the adoption of tools (e.g. EATS - Environmental Assessment Tool for School meals ) to help engage school 
staff (and  potentially students) with creating low -carbon meals through consideration of ingredients, food miles and cooking 
methods  Short Term  
5.5 Reduce the carbon emissions of 
city events and improve their 
sustainability  
 Actions Nottingham City Council  can take   
5.5.1 Introduce a d eposit scheme at all Nottingham City Council  events to reduce single use plastic  Short Term  
Actions we can take in partnership  
5.5.2 Work with local partners and core cities to explore creating local standards, compliance and incentives  Medium Term  
How Central Government can help  
5.5.3 Align to national days of action to reinforce the message of collective action  Ongoing  
5.5.4 Identify options for improving the sustainability of city events  Short Term  
5.6 Develop sustainable tourism  Actions we can take in partnership  
5.6.1 Develop clear standards for leisure, tourism and accommodation venues  Medium Term  
 
5.7 Buy and procure sustainably, and 
maximise existing resources  
 
 Actions Nottingham City Council  can take   
5.7.1 Investigate available tools to incorporate whole -life costing into procurement process with support from finance  Short Term  
5.7.2 Reuse internal resources and goods wherever possible  Short Term  
5.7.3 Review, update and launch a new Business Charter with a strong environmental focus  Short Term  
Actions we can take in partnership  
5.7.4  Work with city partners, including N ottingham City Homes , to develop and support sharing platforms and libraries to 
reduce the need for individual ownership of goods that have occasional usage  Short Term  
5.7.5  Promote ethical sustainable purchasing and swapping of goods through re -use schemes, shops and initiatives  Medium  Term  
5.7.6 Work with partners and networks in the city to develop supplier engagement days through procurement activities to 
support SMEs across all sectors to become more sustainable and low carbon in their operations  Medium Term  
How Central Government can help  
5.7.7 Support or regulate greater levels of reusable and recyclable packaging, in line with national Waste Strategy principles  Medium  Term   /43 
 
Carbon Removal  
 Section Two – Carbon Removal  /44 
 
Section Two – Carbon Removal  
Nottingham is considering practices to remove carbon, primarily  
within the boundaries of the local authority . This includes tree 
planting, woodland and parks management amongst other means . 
This increases the capture of CO 2, in a process called sequestration 
and would allow Nottingham to offset emissions elsewhere in the 
city, helping to achieve our carbon neutral commitment.  
Whilst offsetting practices, which can be undertaken to help 
Nottingham’s carbon neutral ambition, will begin to be identified, 
offsetting will not be actively promoted above actions to reduce 
carbon emissions directly.  
Nottingham’s carbon budget currently assumes that we will not  be 
using technologies to remove CO 2 from the atmosphere. These 
technologies are currently unproven at scale and relying on them 
would create uncertainties in Nottingham’s contribution to future 
climate change  action . Theoretically, if these technologies were to 
become widely available and u sed, Nottingham’s carbon budget 
would become bigger. However, it is important that Nottingham 
does not assume this before these technologies become well  
proven, otherwise we risk contributing to a warmer world.  
Current Activities, Actions and Programmes  
 Planting up to 50 ,000 trees 
 Diversifying amenity grass areas to create wildflower 
meadows, creating Bee Friendly Habitats in every Ward  
 Introducing an integrated weed management and planting 
plan to reduce pesticide use  
Objectives  
 Offset residual citywide e missions from hard to reduce 
sources  
 Participate and actively encourage national 
research/investment into negative emission technologies  
 Improve land and building management practices to better 
retain carbon  
Case Study: Trees for Cities  
The City Council is committed to planting 50,000 new trees by  the 
end of 2023. This started in winter 2019 with 300 tree ‘whips’ 
(young trees) planted at Southglade Park, 1,650 at Clifton Playing 
Fields and 1,200 planted at Colwick Park.  
So far in 2020, a further 2,800 wh ips have been planted at 
Southglade Park, and later in the year, 3,200 will be settled at 
Hadden Wood, Bilborough. Funding for this first stage of planting 
has come from the Trees for Cities charity and Nottingham City 
Council.  Section Two – Carbon Removal  /45 
 
Actions  
Objective   Action   Timescale   
6.1 Offset  residual  citywide  emissions  
from hard to reduce  sources   
 Actions Nottingham City Council  can take:   
6.1.1 Explore placing a value on internal unavoidable carbon emissions to seed  fund staff -led projects and other invest -save 
carbon projects   Short Term  
6.1.2 Investigate the use of parks  and open spaces to offset carbon for individuals and local businesses  emissions  Short Term  
6.1.3 Ensure Open and Green Spaces are sustainable through the new 25 year strategy and offer diverse, bee friendly habitats 
, including offering training for bee friendly gardens and establishing ‘bee hotels’ through Nottingham City Homes  Short Term  
6.1.4 Use offsetting practices (e.g. tree planting) as  an educational opportunity for  local residents  and schools about 
the issues  we face  and the available solutions   Short Term  
6.1.5 Explore creating a climate offset fund through implementing an internal offset charge for council run events from the 
financial year 2021/22 . This fund can be used for activities such as tree planting or installing energy efficient measures 
elsewhere for example  Short Term  
Actions we can take in partnership:   
6.1.6 Promote schemes to allow homeowners and organisations  to access trees and seeds for gardens and premises  Short Term  
6.2 Participate  and actively  
encourage  national  
research/investment  into negative  
emission  technologies   Actions we can take in partnership:   
6.2.1 Investigate possible partnerships with academic institutions and local business to generate funding for the exploration of 
negative emission technologies  Short Term  
6.3 Improve  land and building  
management  practices  to better  
retain  carbon  e.g. within  soil and 
reduce  particle  air pollution  
 Actions Nottingham City Council  can take:   
6.3.1 Explore the opportunities and feasibility for urban greening (e.g. street trees), tree planting and green roofs/walls  and 
promote them through the new Biodiversity Supplementary Planning Documents  Short Term  
6.3.2 Promote local scale offsetting as a normal function of future planning processes    Ongoing  
6.3.3 Future Parks Accelerator Parks and Heritage Strategy to 2050 to include maximum carbon sequestration through detailed 
tree/meadow planting/growing, rewilding, soil management, waterways and wetland planning, informed by Phase 1 habitat 
mapping, opportunity mapping and tree canopy surveys  Short Term  
6.3.4 Seek to adopt  the biodiversity, green and open spaces supplementary planning d ocument to ensure a consistent 
approach for developers to take up protection and enhancement measures of key biodiverse areas  Short Term  
6.3.5 Investigate the potential for using Supplementary Planning Documents to maximise carbon sink potentials   Short Term  
Actions we can take in partnership:   
6.3.6 Research the carbon released during developments on green spaces and how to mitigate the impacts through on site and 
off site interventions, whilst understanding the green benefits  Long Term   
  
Resilience & Adaptation  
 
Carbon Neutral Nottingham  Section Three – Resilience and Adaptation  /47 
 
Section Three  – Resilience & Adaptatio n
Nottingham is already experiencing a range of climate impacts, 
including heat waves and flooding , but in the future these are 
expected to become more frequent and severe, alongside a likely 
increase in water shortages, food shortages and decreased urban 
biodiversity.  
Adaptation refer s to actions that reduce vulnerability to climate 
change impacts, reducing its effect on social,  economic and natural 
systems, w hilst, resilience refers to the ability of a system and its 
components to anticipate, absorb and rec over from effects of an 
event in an efficient and timely manner. Both adaptation and 
resilience are especially important when taking action against future 
climate change and must be considered alongside actions to 
reduce carbon emissions across the city.  Interventions must find the 
right balance of blue, green and grey infrastructure in the city.  
Current Activities, Actions and Programmes  
 Creating new green and blue infrastructure projects to help 
defend properties from local flood events.  
 Work to protect 1 ,000 more properties from the risk of flooding  
Key Objectives  
 Ensure adaptation to climate change has a strong foundation 
in future policie s 
 Reduce risk of flooding to properties and infrastructure  
 Ensure all core City Council services are adaptable to a 
changing climate  
 Understand the current and future impacts of extreme 
weather events and climate change . 
 Create resilience in communities and business  
Case Study: Blue -Green City  
The University of Nottingham’s Water Works Interdisciplinary 
Research Cluster  is a collection of more than 1 40 engineers, 
scientists, geographers, historians, health experts and many 
more, working in collaboration to pioneer new ways to 
address global water challenges. Water Works also supports 
local research, such as transforming Nottingham into a Blue -
Green city, and is therefore, assisting in the development of 
the Blue -Green Cities project between Nottingham City 
Council and the University of Nottingham.  
The future vision of how Nottingham may adapt to become 
more resilient to t he impacts of climate change through the 
prioritisation of Blue -Green infrastructure to manage water 
challenges and deliver multiple co -benefits to the 
environment and society is a key collaboration between the 
University and City Council. The details of t hese water 
challenges, and other environmental and social challenges 
linked to climate change, are being developed in order to 
enhance and link blue green infrastructure priorities.  Section Three – Resilience and Adaptation  /48 
 
 
Actions  
Objective   Action  Timescale   
7.1 Ensure  adaptation  to climate  change  
has a strong  foundation  in future  policies  Actions Nottingham City Council  can take:   
7.1.1 Land and Plann ing p olices  documents  to include adaption for heatwaves and  floods  Short Term  
7.1.2 Integrate adaptation thoroughly into the new citywide Resilience and Climate Change Strategy   Short Term  
7.2 Reduce  risk of flooding  to properties  
and infrastructure   Actions Nottingham City Council  can take:   
7.2.1 Reduce the number of homes and businesses across Nottingham that are exposed to flood risk  Medium Term  
7.2.2 Acknowledge flood risk and flood management in all new develo pments in high flood risk areas   Ongoing  
7.2.3 Through development opportunities, s eek to open up main rivers  and create wetlands , natural fl ood defences and 
urban drainage,  as supported by the Local Plan and Biodiversity Supplementary Planning Document  Long Term  
Actions we can take in partnership:   
7.2.4  Work with partners and organisations to conduct in depth flood risk mapping across Nottingham e.g. Nottingham Trent 
University and Environment Agency.   Short Term  
7.2.5  Ensure Emergency Plans are adapted to reflect the changing risk through the Local Resilience Forum  Short Term  
7.2.6  Explore and encourage innovative technologies and natural interventions (Blue and Green infr astructure) to reduce 
flood  and heat risk within urbanised areas  Medium Term  
7.2.7 Maintain highways and other assets, removing blockages, to reduce the risk of surface water floods  Ongoing  
How Central Government can help:   
7.2.8  Increase the available funding for flood risk management to meet the growing need for action, particularly related to 
surface water flooding   
7.3 Ensure  all core City Council  services  
are adaptable  to a changing  climate  Actions Nottingham City Council  can take:   
7.3.1 Improve knowledge and understanding of how the Council is affected by extreme weather events in terms of  
providing its services and its financial impact  Ongoing  
7.3.2 Investigate historic claims information and damages that arise from the impacts of severe weather events, mapping 
any trends to help inform future actions and understanding  Short Term  
7.3.3 Develop Council and service level plans for adapting  to climate change  Medium Term  
Actions we can take in partnership:  
7.3.4  Work with partners and other local authorities to help evaluate and develop suitable tools to help understand impacts 
to council service areas  Short Term  
7.4 Understand  the current  and future  
impacts  of extreme  weather  events  and 
climate  change,  with an in-depth  
knowledge  of the most  vulnerable  
citizens   Actions Nottingham City Council  can take:   
7.4.1 Establish a methodology with partners to undertake a full citywide vulnerability assessment for extreme weather 
events and future climate change  scenarios .  Short Term  
7.4.2 Identify those most at risk from extreme weather events, such as heat waves and develop mitigating actions  Short Term  
7.4.3 Assist marginalised and vulnerable groups to become more resilient.  Deliver educational engagement  programme 
with target communities (Pilot project with Nottingham Trent University in 2020)   Short Term  Section Three – Resilience and Adaptation  /49 
 
Objective   Action  Timescale   
 7.4.4 Conduct a Local Climate Impact Profile (LCLIP) for Nottingham, to help understand the impacts on citizens and 
businesses, building a citywide picture of current impacts.  
 Short Term  
 
7.5 Create  resilience  to climate  change  
in communities  and business  
 Actions Nottingham City Council  can take:    
7.5.1 Work with citizen across Nottingham to ensure those most vulnerable and at high risk to severe weather events are on 
the priority service register and have signed up to alerts (e.g. flood risk alerts).  Ongoing  
Actions we can take in partnership:   
7.5.2 Work with businesses across the city to help them develop business continuity plans in response to climate change 
and extreme weather events  Ongoing  
7.5.3 Work with residents and communities to empower them to become more resilient to current and  future climate change 
impacts, including the use of simple interventions  Ongoing  Section Three – Resilience and Adaptation  /50 
 
Ecology & Biodiversity  
 Section Four – Ecology & Biodiversity  /51 
 
Section Four – Ecology & Biodiversity  
Biodiversity and climate change are closely related to both 
seasonality and the distribution of wildlife being impacted by 
changes in temperatures and rainfall.  The loss of habitats  can also 
increase the amount of carbon in the environment. Therefore 
having robust, well -functioning ecosystems will protect against the 
negative impacts of climate change and contribute to helping us 
adapt to further changes in climate. Measures to reduc e our carbon 
footprint help towards safeguarding the biodiversity around us, and 
this is why the Council recognises the importance of declaring a 
climate and ecological emergency. The Council recognises this 
additional challenge to already damaged ecosyste ms making the 
United Kingdom “one of the most nature -depleted countries in the 
world” according to the 2016 State of Nature Report.  
Approximately 25% of Nottingham is classed as Green & Open 
Space Network, with different types of land use ranging from 
‘natural’ to ‘institutional’, incorporating protected sites and green 
corridors. Natural sites provide habitats that store carbon in soils 
and vegetation; absorb carbon from the atmosphere; provide food 
and water supplies and provide natural drainage solutions  to reduce 
flooding and the impacts of climate change. Well -functioning rivers 
and natural wetland systems can slow down water flows and reduce 
flooding. Trees also provide a range of benefits to us including 
shade to keep us cool in extreme temperatures, intercepting rainfall, 
reducing flash flooding and the reduction of soil erosion all adding 
to the our resilience against impacts of climate change. It should also be noted that the benefits of contact with nature for human 
health are now widely recognised , which can also foster greater 
appreciation and support for protecting and enhancing our natural 
environment.  
It is vital to recognise and understand the importance of the City’s 
greenspaces as carbon sinks and target management practices to 
avoid releasi ng stored carbon. This should be considered too, in the 
planning and development process and when assessing land use 
changes.  
Current Activities, Actions and Programmes  
 Implementation of the Biodiversity Supplementary Planning 
Document (SPD) and protection  in the Local Plan (LAPP) – 
including the establishment of green roofs and Sustainable 
Urban Drainage Systems (SUDS)  
 Open space network (OSN) – protected in the Land and 
Planning Policies Document  
 Protected sites network including Local Nature Reserves 
(LNRs), Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs) and Local 
Wildlife Sites (LWS)  
 Tree Planting and the Bee Friendly Council commitments 
including rewilding schemes  
 Natural flood mitigation along Day Brook and Tottle Brook  Section Four – Ecology & Biodiversity  /52 
 
Key Objectives  
 Identify ‘more, better, bigger, joined’ habitat networks  
 Increase woodland cover in appropriate places and manag e 
sustainable woodlands  
 Instal l innovative natural features to developments, as per the 
Biodiversity S PD 
 Contribute towards improved crop production and plant 
propagation through having a Bee friendly city  
In addition to Nottingham’s  key objectives, there are a range of 
national objectives within the government’s 25 Year Environment 
Plan that we will support , including : 
1. Using and managing land sustainably  
2. Recovering nature and enhancing the beauty of landscapes  
3. Connecting people with the environment to improve health and 
wellbeing  
Opportunities and Benefits  
 Enhance biodiversity  
 Increase trees  for shade and lower the heat of urban areas  
 Increase carbon storage by providing  habitats  
 Sustain, increase and enhance a network to build resilience of 
species and habitats  
 Reduce flooding   
 Build on research and knowledge of how Nottingham’s open 
space n etwork can contribute towards the City being carbon 
neutral  
 
 
Case Study: Bee Friendly 
Nottingham  
 As part of the Council’s commitment to 
biodiversity, we have set the following 
corporate target to ‘Ensure Nottingham is a 
“bee-friendly” city with suitable habitats in 
every neighbourhood’.  
A programme of relaxed mowing throughout the city has been 
introduced to improve feeding and nesting habitats for bees and other 
pollinating insects. Reducing vehicle use will decrease carbon 
emissions, by mowing the veget ation once a year. Targeted along 
roadside verges, the rewilding of corridors for wildlife will help create 
‘corridors’ of open space, building resilience to the changes in 
climate.  
Visual displays of wildflowers help to improve both people’s 
experience o f the City and their connectedness to nature, as well as 
undoubtedly improving habitats for our pollinators and the benefits 
they bring us.  
Other planting schemes, educational activities and increased 
community engagement are key to contributing towards a ‘Bee 
Friendly Nottingham’ and will be introduced as part of this scheme.   
 
Section Four – Ecology & Biodiversity  /53 
 
Actions  
Objective   Action   Timescale   
8.1 Identify  more,  better,  bigger,  joined  
habitat  network  Actions Nottingham City Council  can take:   
8.1.1 Identify sites for additional tree planting, relaxed mowing, wildflower growth, hedge planting through opportunity 
mapping, helping to create diverse habitats in Council owned parks and open spaces  Short Term  
8.1.2 Identify sites which meet the criteria for Local Nature Reserve designation to expand protected sites’ network  Long Term  
Actions we can take in partnership:   
8.1.3  Update Phase 1 habitat mapping and biodiversity opportunity mapping to understand development opportunities and 
future habitat options for the op en space network outlined in open and green space plans  Medium Term  
8.1.4 Work in partnership with the Nottinghamshire Biodiversity Action Group and other stakeholders to build future 
resilience of habitats and species and identify habitats for carbon sequestration  Medium Term  
8.2 Increase  woodland  cover  in 
appropriate  places  and managing  
sustainable  woodlands  Actions Nottingham City Council  can take:   
8.2.1 Update Nottingham’s Urban Forestry Strategy including the assessment of existing woodlands, with understorey 
planting and expansion programmes introduced where necessary  Short Term  
8.2.2 Continue to sustainably manage existing woodland and prevent its degradation  Ongoing  
Actions we can take in partnership:   
8.2.3 Work with partners to identify sites for woodland creation and promote tree planting across privately owned land, 
schools and businesses  Short Term  
8.3 Install  innovative  natural  features  to 
developments,  as per the Biodiversity  
SPD  Actions Nottingham City Council  can take:   
8.3.1 Support the Biodiversity SPD by including biodiversity enhancements to all developments, ensuring net gain in 
biodiversity  Ongoing  
8.3.2 Consider green roofs, green walls, and sustainable urban drainage systems, in new developments  Medium Term  
Actions we can take in partnership:   
8.3.3 Identify aspirational projects for  small scale wetland creation, biodiversity enhancement opportunities and natural flood 
defences  Long Term  
8.3.4 Encourage sustainable and nature friendly development beyond the levels mandated by legislation  Medium Term  
8.4 Contribute  towards  improved  crop 
production  and plant  propagation  
through  having  a Bee friendly  city Actions Nottingham City Council  can take:   
8.4.1 Introduce phased implementation of bee friendly projects that have been identified  across Nottingham’s parks and 
open spaces, this includes rewilding, shrub, tree and bulb planting and seeding.  Short Term  
Actions we can take in partnership:   
8.4.2 Work with partner organisations to encourage developers, businesses, schools and private homeowners to become 
pollinator friendly  Short Term  
 Glossary  /54 
 
Glossary  
1.5oC Temperature 
rise  This refers to the rise in the average global 
temperature above the pre -industrial period (pre -
1750)  
Adaptation  Actions to reduce vulnerability to climate change 
impacts, reducing its effects on social, economic and 
natural systems  
ALMO  Arms Lengths M anagement Organisation  
BEIS  UK government department of Business, Energy and 
Industrial Strategy  
Biodiversity  The variety of animal and plant life on Earth  
Business as usual  Future emissions trend if the current state of affairs 
continue as they are today  
Carbon budget  The maximum amount of carbon dioxide that can be 
emitted to be in line with keeping temperatures well 
below 2oC and pursue a 1.5oC limit to rising 
temperatures  
Carbon dioxide (CO 2)  A key greenhouse gas with a long -lifetime in the 
atmosphere and both natural and human sources.  
Carbon neutral  Having no net release of carbon dioxide into the 
atmosphere  
Climate change  The long -term change of climate, typically measured 
over decades or longer. This is different to weather, 
which is now.  
Climate emergency  Climate change presents the greatest threat to life: 
on the economy, social well -being and the natural 
environment  Carbon Offsetting  Practices and technologies to neutralise remaining 
emissions that cannot be removed entirely.  
CO 2e  Carbon dioxide equivalence; this includes all 
greenhouse gasses converted into the equivalent 
amount of carbon dioxide.  
D2N2  The Local Enterprise Partnership for Derby, 
Derbyshire, Nottingham and Nottinghamshire.  
Ecosystem  Community of living organisms and the natural 
environment  
Future Parks 
Accelerator  The FPA fund will support Nottingham to grow the 
contribution parks make to  civic life whilst becoming 
financially sustainable. It will involve discovering how 
parks and green spaces could be better used, 
managed and funded to serve community needs and 
aspirations now and over the next generation.  
Global warming  Increase in temperature of the Earth’s atmosphere 
over long timescales, caused by increased levels of 
greenhouse gasses  
Greenhouse gas 
(GHG)  The Earth can maintain a regular average 
temperature (about 15oC) despite heat leaving the 
planet’s surface beca use a layer of gases in the 
atmosphere absorb and release heat – a process 
known as the greenhouse effect. Greenhouse gases 
are those that have this effect, each with differing 
lifetimes and abilities to capture heat (infrared 
radiation).  
kWp  The peak power of a PV system or panel.  Glossary  /55 
 
MtCO 2  Millions of tonnes of carbon dioxide  
NOx Term for the nitrogen oxides that are most relevant 
for air pollution, namely nitric oxide and nitrogen 
dioxide.  
Resilience  The ability of a system and its component parts to 
anticipate, absorb, accommodate, or recover from the 
effects of a hazardous event in a timely and efficient 
manner, including through ensuring the preservation, 
restoration, or improvement of its essential  basic 
structures and functions  
Scope 1 Emissions  Greenhouse gas emissions from using owned or 
controlled sources (mainly energy related)  Scope 2 Emissions   Greenhouse gas emissions occurring as a 
consequence of the use of grid -supplied electricity, 
heat, steam and/or cooling  
Scope 3 Emissions  All other greenhouse gas emissions that occur as a 
result of activities taking place within wider 
operations, supply chains, investments etc  
Solar PV  Solar Photovoltaic  
Sustainability  Meeting the needs of current generations, without 
compromising future generations or the natural 
environment  
ULEV  Ultra -Low Emission Vehicle   
   
 
 
 
 
 
For more information about 2028, please visit:  
 
www.nottinghamcity.gov.uk/cn2028  
 
