The Reading Climate  
Emergency Strategy  
2020-25
November 2020
TABLE OF CONTENTS
FOREWORD   03
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS   05
1.0 INTRODUCTION   06
1.1 The Reading Climate Emergency Strategy   06
1.2 Purpose of this document   06
1.3 Ownership of the strategy   06
2.0 CLIMATE CHANGE: THE CONTEXT   07
2.1 The global and national context   07
2.2 Global and national progress to date   08
2.3 The local context: Reading’s carbon footprint   09
2.4 Reading’s progress to date   09
2.5 Reading’s exposure to climate change impacts   10
3.0 VISION AND TARGETS   11
3.1 Our vision   11
3.2 Our target   11
3.3 Preparing Reading for the impacts of climate change   11
3.4 The benefits of taking action on climate change   12
4.0 READING’S PATHW AY TO NET ZERO BY 2030   14
4.1  Reading’s energy demand and priorities on the pathway to net zero   14
4.2  The pathway to net zero in numbers for energy use  
in the built environment   14
4.3  Decarbonising power supply and the need for Reading to ‘go electric’   15
4.4  Lessons from the COVID-19 pandemic   155.0 DELIVERING THE STRATEGY   17
5.1  The role of the Reading Climate Change Partnership and other partners   17
5.2  Resources for strategy implementation   17
5.3  Action Plans for key themes   18
 - Energy and Low Carbon Development   19
 - Transport   26
 - Resources   34
 - Water   40
 - Nature   47
 - Health and Wellbeing   54
6.0 COMMUNICATIONS AND ENGAGEMENT   59
6.1 Our ambition for community engagement in action on climate change   59
6.2  A climate change communications and engagement plan for Reading   59
7.0 GOVERNANCE, MONITORING AND REPORTING   65
7.1 Monitoring and reporting   65
7.2 Governance   65
GLOSSARY OF TERMS   66
ACRONYMS USED   67
 2
As the new decade began, the impacts of a changing climate were making 
headlines around the world. The wildfires, floods and extremes of temperature 
now being experienced are all worryingly consistent with what the climate science 
has been predicting. In 2018 the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) 
concluded that to limit global warming to 1.5 degrees – considered necessary to avert 
the most catastrophic impacts – would require ‘rapid, far-reaching and unprecedented 
changes in all aspects of society’. Through the declaration of a climate emergency in 
February 2019, and commitment to the goal of a net zero carbon Reading by 2030, 
our community has embraced the call to action laid down by the IPCC.
Reading has a proud history of taking action on climate change – since 2005, carbon 
emissions per person have fallen by 52% in the borough, the 4th largest reduction 
of any local authority in England. Reading Borough Council has reduced its own 
carbon footprint by 62.5% since 2008 and many other partners in Reading have made 
significant steps on the journey to net zero carbon. But we know these impressive 
achievements are not enough. We must now re-double our efforts to accelerate 
the journey towards a net zero carbon Reading in the short time which the science 
suggests is available. 
The 2018 IPCC report also highlighted the many benefits to people and the 
environment which would flow from taking action on climate change as the 
measures required should also contribute to a more equitable and sustainable society. 
So, responding positively to the climate emergency is also aligned with Reading’s 
aspiration to achieve clean and inclusive economic development from which the whole 
community benefits: as well as being a practical necessity, responding to the climate 
emergency represents a major opportunity. The transition to net zero carbon also 
needs to be a just transition, so that the costs and benefits are apportioned fairly. 
This is really important to bear in mind as we think about people whose home has 
been flooded, whose health has suffered or whose children have asked whether they 
have a future they can look forward to: for them the impacts of a changing climate 
already feel very real, and research shows that the most vulnerable people will bear 
the brunt of these impacts. Climate change is happening now and the die is cast for 
the coming decades – preparing for these changes will be an essential part of our 
future strategy. Public concern for the state of the environment has never been higher, 
so publication of this strategy has not come a moment too soon. 
The aim of the Reading Climate Change Partnership in producing this strategy is to 
set out a clear pathway to a net zero carbon, resilient Reading and to harness the 
commitment of everybody who lives, works, studies or plays in Reading to work 
together to achieve this ambition. In this sense we believe that the Partnership is 
truly what it describes: a close collaboration and an open and transparent working 
arrangement between business, academia, NGOs, community groups, the people of 
Reading and Reading Borough Council.FOREWORD
by Co-Chairs of the Reading  
Climate Change Partnership
So please, treat the climate crisis  
like the acute crisis it is and give us  
a future.Our lives are in your hands.
– Greta Thunberg (2019)
 3
The net zero carbon transition presents huge challenges, but it is clear that the costs 
and risks of embracing it will be far outweighed by the costs and risks of not taking 
action. We must also recognise that many of the factors which will influence our 
ability to reach net zero by 2030 remain out of the control of the partners in Reading 
and will require clear commitment by, for example, our national government. This 
strategy therefore sets out not only the action we need to take ourselves to tackle the 
climate emergency, but also the steps we need others to take to help us deliver our 
ambitious aims. 
Ultimately, we cannot ignore the fact that this strategy is being launched in the 
context of the COVID-19 global pandemic. Indeed, the launch was delayed by four 
months as the public consultation stage was extended to allow people time to adapt 
to the new ways of living necessary to reduce infection rates. The imminent existential 
threat of the virus is clearly an urgent priority for all of us, but the risk of deep and 
lasting harm from climate change remains, and we cannot wait until we have resolved 
one threat before we address the other.
The COVID-19 crisis has disrupted our lives in many ways, some of which have 
reduced carbon emissions and contributed to ‘climate-positive’ behaviour. For 
example, the reduction in air traffic and commuting has reduced emissions and air 
quality has improved in many towns and cities, including Reading. Being confined to 
our homes has brought many of us a new appreciation of the importance of green 
spaces for health and wellbeing; it has also changed our patterns of consumption. 
But at the same time there are new waste streams being created by disposable masks 
and plastic gloves, as well as the manufacturing impacts of producing items that were 
not necessary previously. This new reality has to be taken into account alongside the 
extensive feedback received through public consultation.So, as Reading re-thinks its future in the light of COVID-19, we also need to think 
about how we plan for the longer-term: to think and re-imagine Reading as a greener, 
more resilient and net zero carbon urban area to 2030, and beyond to 2050. This 
also connects to the ongoing work of Reading 2050 and the recovery strategies of 
various partners, so we will need to collaborate to ensure Reading’s approach is closely 
integrated and produces a recovery that uses the crisis as an opportunity to tackle 
climate change and create sustainable, inclusive economic growth.
As we said earlier, this has been very much a partnership effort and we would like to 
express our appreciation to the members of the Reading Climate Change Partnership 
Board, the theme leads and group members who have given generously of their 
time and expertise to develop this strategy. We are especially grateful for the huge 
enthusiasm and commitment of our predecessor, Chris Beales, who completed his 
two-year term as Chair in April 2020 and who steered the strategy through most of 
the development phase. 
Finally, we would like to thank all of the individuals and groups who attended 
our discovery events and responded to the consultation – we look forward to you 
playing an active role in helping deliver our shared vision for a net zero carbon, 
resilient Reading. 
Professor Tim Dixon
Tracey Rawling Church
Co-chairs of Reading Climate Change PartnershipWhat happens next is up to us all… 
I truly believe that together we can 
bring about the transformative 
change that is needed.
– Sir David Attenborough
 4
Anon Ahmad
Jacquie Allan
Mohammed Ayub
Emma Baker
Adele Barnett-Ward
Niki Barton
Chris Beales
Rebecca Blakey
John Booth
Ben Bosh
Katie Brett
Lorraine Briffitt
Micheal Bright
Monika Bulmer
Sarah Burchard
Ben Burfoot
Sarah Burr
Oliver Burt
Susannah Bury
Cris  Butler
Andrew Charlton-Perez
Alan Clark
Joanna Clark
Phil Coker
Kirstin Coley 
Duncan Cook
Tony Cowling
Adam Daum
Tim Dixon
Paul Ducker
Linda Duff
Muhammed El-Beik
David Fallon
Paul Fishwick
Pascal Flohr
Malcolm Fowles
Giorgio Framalicco
Natalie GanpatsinghMargaret Gardner
Andy Gillespie
Cristina Gomez
Tony Goodchild
Steven Gough
Clare Grashoff
Lilian Green 
Evangeline Haggarty
Sarah Hanson 
Faye Hargreaves
Poppy Harris
Paul Harrison
Rachel Hazell
Hazel Hill
Kathryn Horsepool
Nigel Horton-Baker
Christina Hughes Nind
Andrew Hughes Nind
Iris Hunt
Katherine Hyde 
Ross Jarvis
Carolyn Jenkins
Barbara Jerome
Michael Keith-Lucas
Paul Kemp
Sara Kopp
Adrian Lawson
Pam Lewis
Zsuzsi Lindsay 
James Lloyd
Luke Lloyd
Willem Londeman
Chris Maddocks
Tricia Marcouse
Jill Marston
Frances Martin
Mark D Mathews, 
Rayner MayerKathryn McCann
Amanda McDonnell
Leanne McKrill
Tracey Middleton
Eugene Mohareb
Peter Moore
Tomiko Morley
Brian Morley
Oscar Mortali
Marielle Mouyon
Clare Muir
Stephen Naylor
Katherine Naylor
Yolanda Nicholson 
Alex Nickson
Andrew Nind
Jackie Oversby 
Tony Page
Helen Palmer
Sophie Paul
Ellen Pilsworth
Richard Price
Lucy Prismall
Erica Purvis
Rosie Rand
Tracey Rawling Church
Nick Read
Gill Ringland
Elizabeth Robinson
Francis Rooney
Karen Rowland
Dot Roy
David Rylands
Michael Sage 
Mick Schrey
Beth Scott
Jenny Searle
John SharpeSam Shean
Helen Sheldrake
Debbie Shore 
Caroline Smith
Ayo Sokale 
Helena Soteriou
Ben Stanesby 
Mark Stanley
Trevor Teer
Andrew Tucker
James Turner
Owen Turpin, 
Anke Uberberg
Alexa Volker
Melanie Ward
Nicky Wheeler 
Oliver White
Rob White
Jill Wigmore-Welsh
Rose Williams
Stephen Wise
Scott Witchalls
Mark Worringham
Vincent Zhuo
A special thank you to Ed Hawkins, 
University of Reading for his permission 
to use his climate stripes imagery.  
The progression from blue (cooler) 
to red (warmer) stripes portrays the 
long-term increase in average global 
temperature for Berkshire from 1850 
(left side of graphic) to the present day.
#showyourstripesAcknowledgments
We would like to thank the following people for their contribution to this document:
 5
1. INTRODUCTION
1.1 The Reading Climate Emergency Strategy
Following the declaration of a climate emergency in Reading in 20191, plans to produce 
a third Reading climate change strategy, scheduled for the latter part of 2020, were 
brought forward by six months. As a result, a consultation draft Reading Climate 
Emergency Strategy for 2020-25 was published in March 2020. The consultation 
period was extended due to COVID-19, and a planned launch in July 2020 was 
correspondingly postponed until November 2020.
1.2  Purpose of this document
This document, The Reading Climate Emergency Strategy 2020-25, sets out the action 
required during this critical five-year period to work towards the objective of a net zero 
carbon Reading by 2030, the target adopted in the climate emergency declaration. 
It also considers how we can adapt to the impacts of a changing climate. Following 
engagement and discussion with stakeholders, and a series of events and initiatives to 
engage the wider public culminating in a formal public consultation to which over 200 
responses were received, this document has been compiled by the organisations who 
come together in the Reading Climate Change Partnership. 
1.3  Ownership of the strategy
Production of this strategy has been co-ordinated by the Reading Climate Change 
Partnership with input from over 100 stakeholders across Reading. The Reading 
Climate Change Partnership is a community partnership established in 2009 to lead 
the response to climate change in the Reading area. The Partnership’s Board includes 
representation from the community and voluntary sector, the statutory sector, the 
private sector, the health sector and academia. If the strategy is to succeed, however, 
the action within it needs to be ‘owned’ by every organisation, business and resident 
across Reading. The Partnership  therefore invites partners to adopt, endorse or 
otherwise commit to its delivery via the most appropriate means. To start this process, 
Reading Borough Council, which passed the Climate Emergency Declaration on behalf 
of the wider community, endorsed the strategy at a meeting of its Policy Committee 
on 2nd November 2020.
1 https://www.reading.gov.uk/council/climate-change/ 
  62. CLIMATE CHANGE: THE CONTEXT
2.1 The global and national context
There is an overwhelming scientific consensus that human activity has been 
responsible for a dramatic increase in emissions of carbon dioxide and other 
greenhouse gases since the start of the Industrial Revolution, and that this has already 
been the cause of a rise in average global temperature of around 1°C. We also 
know that we are already ‘locked in’ to a further rise in average global temperatures 
as a result of past emissions which are likely to set off ‘feedback’ loops which will 
accelerate warming still further. 
For society and our way of life to continue in its current form, it was, until recently, 
generally held that the rise in global temperature needed to be kept to 2°C. But most authorities now agree that even a 1.5°C rise is likely to have very significant negative 
impacts on human society and the critical ecosystems on which it depends.
A key turning point in international climate change policy came in 2018 when the Inter-
governmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), the UN body created to assess the science 
on climate change, published a report which advised that the international community 
should aim to limit global warming to 1.5°C, as opposed to the previous ‘target’ of 2°C. 
Their review of over 6,000 sources of evidence found that, with a rise of 1.5°C, there 
would be very significant risks to health, livelihoods, food security, water supply, human 
security and economic growth. A rise to 2°C would be even more catastrophic. 
This conclusion led to a renewed focus on 2030 as a target to meet emissions reduction 
goals which had previously been set for 2050. While most of the world’s national 
governments remain focused on achieving net zero carbon dioxide emissions by 2050, 
many municipalities have adopted the more ambitious goal of net zero by 2030.
Fig 1:  Why every degree of warming matters (Source: Committee on Climate Change2)
2 https://www.theccc.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/CCC-Net zero-Infographic.pngUnchecked emissions growth would lead 
to very severe and widespread climate 
change at 4°C or more by 2100.Damaging climate impacts are already 
being felt today at 1°C of warming.Climate change is here today:
• The frequency of heatwaves has 
increased around the world. Many 
extreme events are being made 
more likely due to climate change
• Sensitive ecosystems, such as 
coral reefs, are being damaged 
due to extreme heat
• Animals on the land and the 
ocean are shifting their territories 
in response to climate change
The world is moving towards a low 
carbon future, reducing some risks. 
We are currently on track for around 
3°C of warming by 2100.The world has committed to reduce 
emissions faster to keep warming 
‘well-below’ 2°C. This would help 
limit the most damaging effects of 
climate change.Keeping below 1.5°C would limit many 
important risks further, helping to protect 
key ecosystems and reducing impacts on 
poorer people around the world.4°C
3°C
2°C1.5°C1°C
 7
2.2  Global and national progress to date
Many agree that the global response to the challenge 
laid down by the IPCC has fallen well short of 
what the science suggests is necessary to limit 
the rise in global average temperatures to ‘safe’ 
levels. Emissions have continued to rise making the 
challenge of limiting climate change to 1.5°C in the 
short time available much harder. The UK has sought 
to make its contribution through the setting of 
legally binding emissions reduction targets supported 
by five yearly carbon budgets. As a result of the 
policies of successive UK Governments, emissions 
were 44% below 1990 levels in 2018 – heading in 
the right direction but not fast enough to meet some 
of our future carbon budgets.
The UK’s first (2008-12) and second (2013-17) 
carbon budgets have been met and the UK is on 
track to meet the third (2018-22) carbon budget. 
However, according to the Committee on Climate 
Change (CCC), which was established by the 
Government to monitor performance in this area, 
the UK is not currently on track to meet the fourth 
(2023-27) or fifth (2028-2032) carbon budgets. In 
May 20193, the CCC recommended a new emissions 
target for the UK of net zero greenhouse gas 
emissions by 2050 to deliver on the commitment 
made by the UK in the Paris Agreement. 
The CCC advised that this target is achievable with 
known technologies and could be delivered within 
the cost that Parliament accepted when it legislated 
for the existing 2050 target of an 80% reduction 
on 1990 levels. However, the CCC advised that it 
was only possible if ‘clear, stable and well-designed 
policies to reduce emissions further’ are introduced 
across the economy without delay. The CCC’s 2020 
Progress Report to Parliament concluded that while 
‘Initial steps towards a net zero policy package 
have been taken…this was not the year of policy 
progress that the Committee called for in 2019’4.
3 https://www.theccc.org.uk/publication/net zero-the-uks-contribution-to-stopping-global-warming/
4 https://www.theccc.org.uk/publication/reducing-uk-emissions-2020-progress-report-to-parliament/
5 https://www.theccc.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/CCC-Net zero-Infographic.pngFig 2:  Can one country really make a difference? (Source: Committee on Climate Change5)
UK action to address climate change can have an international impact
The UK can, and should, act as a 
leader in the global response to 
climate change – UK emissions 
contributed to causing it, and 
its leadership can have an 
international impact.
Innovation has driven down the costs of 
key technologies such as offshore wind 
and battery storage.
Some costs to consumers, such as 
increased heating bills, can be offset 
by cheaper transport costs (thanks to 
a widespread shift to electric vehicles) 
and cheaper electricity bills (thanks to 
low cost renewable electricity).For the economy
New green industries with new jobs and 
export opportunities for the UK.
For the country
More biodiversity, cleaner water, more 
green space to enjoy.
Reduced global warming, avoiding 
climate damages like flooding.For the individual
Quieter streets, cleaner air, less congestion.
Smarter cities and more  
comfortable homes.
Healthier lifestyles with more active  
travel and healthier diets.There are many benefits of 
phasing out harmful emissions
80% reductions in 
emissions relative 
to 1990 levels
Estimated 2008100% reduction 
in emissions  
in 2050
Estimated todayAnnual costs of achieving net zero 
emissions are between 1-2% of GDP 
in 2050,  comparable to those estimated 
in 2008 for achieving an 80% target.The UK has been a leader on 
climate change action. The UK 
has the opportunity to continue 
its leadership and join other 
countries already pursuing net 
zero emissions targets.The UK has committed to act by 
signing the Paris Agreement. 
This provides many options for 
countries to collaborate to reduce 
their emissions and prepare for 
the impacts of climate change.
Scotland: 
Net Zero  
by 2045
UK: 
Net Zero 
greenhouse  
gas emissions  
by 2050
Wales:  
-95% by 
2050
 8
2.3  The local context: Reading’s carbon footprint
Reading produces over 500 kilo-tonnes of carbon dioxide emissions annually (2018 
figures). As the pie chart shows, around 36% of this ‘carbon footprint’ arises from 
industrial and commercial activity, 40% from domestic sources (heating, lighting and 
appliances) and 21% from transport.
Reading’s per capita emissions have fallen significantly since 2005 – by around 52%. 
Around 17% of this reduction has been due to more low carbon energy going into the 
national grid. While the trend is positive, the way that emissions are measured hides 
the fact that many of the emissions for which we in Reading are ultimately responsibly 
are accounted for elsewhere – in the places where the goods we buy are made and 
the food we consume is produced. As such, our ‘real’ carbon footprint is substantially 
larger then the official figures suggest. At the same time our population has increased 
so gains made through relative reductions in emissions per head are, in part, offset by 
increases in absolute emissions over all. That said, as the bar chart in Fig.3 shows, total 
emissions (as opposed to per capita emissions) from the Reading area have still fallen 
by 47% since 2005.
2.4 Reading’s progress to date
The Reading Climate Change Partnership and its constituent partners have a long 
track record of achievement on climate change. The first Reading Climate Change 
Strategy was adopted in 2008/09 and set priorities for action which were delivered by 
a wide range of partners. As a result:
• Reading’s per capita carbon emissions have fallen by 52% since 2005 – the 4th 
largest reduction of any local authority area in the country 
• Pioneering net zero carbon standards for new homes have been enshrined in the 
Reading Local Plan which governs future development across the Borough
• Reading Borough Council has reduced its own carbon footprint by 62.5% since 
2008/09, avoiding energy costs of £11 million in the process
• Reading’s vibrant voluntary sector and active network of community groups have 
promoted a wide range of climate-related projects, and small grants to local 
organisations, such as Draughtbusters, Transition Town Reading and Econet, have 
funded behaviour change campaigns to reduce carbon emissions and test new 
ideas
• The Reading Community Energy Society has delivered solar arrays on 20 
community buildings, creating enough energy to power approximately 125 
homes, with plans for installation of a further 4,000 solar panels and a new 
Reading Hydro power scheme at Caversham Lock Fig 3:  Reading’s carbon footprint (Source: UK Government emissions data)Reading Borough CO 2 Emissions
 Industry and  
Commercial Electricity
 Industry and  
Commercial Gas
 Domestic Electricity
 Domestic Gas
 Other
 Transport22%
14%
12%28%3%21%
20051,000.0
800.0
600.0
400.0
200.0
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018
 Industry and Commercial Electricity
 Industry and Commercial Gas
 Domestic Electricity
 Domestic GasKTCO 2 (eq)
 9
Buildings and  
energy supplyBusiness and industry Health and wellbeing
Overheating in housing
Overheating in hospitals, care 
homes, schools and offices
Damage to buildings from 
extreme weather events
Increased water stress
Changes required in design, 
construction and management 
of buildings
Increased flood risk to built 
environment
Disruption of power networks 
and supply
Increased urban heat  
island effectDisruption to transport, energy 
and communications
Reduced comfort in buildings 
with impacts on productivity
Risks to supply chains 
(increasing with distance)
Price increases for food and 
other imported commodities
Particular exposure is forecast 
for food, clothing and 
electronics sectorsIncrease in heat-related illness 
and death
Risk to the elderly and 
very young with heart and 
respiratory disease
Disrupted access to services 
and facilities
Flooding impacts on wellbeing 
and livelihoods
Air quality impacts 
exacerbated
More positively, there is 
potential for more outdoor 
lifestyles
Natural environment Transport Water environment
Risk to vulnerable species  
and habitats
Impacts on ‘eco-system 
services’ enjoyed by people
Damage to natural habitats 
from water stress
Impacts of increased drought 
risk on tree health
Risk of invasive/non-native 
species colonising as suitable 
‘climate space’ shifts 
northwardsDisruption of transport 
networks impacting on 
wellbeing and economy
Flood risk to infrastructure
Heavy rain/high winds leading 
to more accidents, treefall, 
road closures and delays
Risk of slope/embankment 
failures
Risk of rails buckling, cables 
sagging and roads softening
Discomfort on public transport
Overheating/failure of 
signalling/comms equipmentFurther stress on already 
stressed water resources
Increased competition for 
water between agriculture, 
industry, households and 
the needs of the natural 
environment
Drought impacts on water 
quality and supply
Increased flash flood risk
Table 1:  Summary of climate risks for key sectors in Reading (Source: Reading Climate Change Adaptation Plan)2.5  Reading’s exposure to climate change impacts
The latest information suggests that 2019 was the second hottest 
summer on record globally with 2016 being the hottest. The last decade 
(2010-19) was also the hottest on record with each decade since the 
1980s being warmer than the last6. As the climate warms, projections 
for the UK show that we are likely to experience milder, wetter winters 
and hotter, drier summers, along with an increasing frequency and 
intensity of extremes:
• Hot summers will become more common – the chance of a summer 
as hot as 2018, one of the hottest on record, has already increased 
from less than 10% to between 10-25% in any one year, and is 
expected to be around 50% by mid-century
• The 2018 heatwave saw Reading reach a high of 32.9°C with no 
rainfall for 30 consecutive days
• Variability in rainfall is increasing so while we can generally expect 
wetter winters there will be some dry winters too, increasing the 
challenge of water resource planning
• Summer rainfall is likely to decrease but when it does rain, it may be 
more intense 
These impacts mean that Reading needs to become more resilient to a 
wider range of conditions than in the past. This is a particular concern 
for vulnerable people in Reading as, in general terms, the evidence 
suggests that the more vulnerable in society will be most exposed to the 
impacts of a changing climate, underlining the need for a just transition 
to a net zero carbon Reading.
6 https://public.wmo.int/en/media/press-release/wmo-confirms-2019-second-hottest-year-record  10
3. VISION AND TARGETS
3.1  Our Vision 
Our vision for 2025 is for a Reading which is working rapidly towards: 
• Net zero carbon dioxide emissions in the Reading area by 2030 
• Being better prepared to deal with the impacts of a changing climate.
We want and need the whole of Reading – residents, communities, businesses and 
other organisations – to mobilise in pursuit of this vision.
3.2 Our target
Our over-arching target is for Reading – defined as the whole Reading local authority 
area – to achieve net zero carbon emissions by 2030. This target is based on the sound 
science outlined by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, recognising the 
need for more ambitious and urgent action to avoid catastrophic climate impacts. This 
recognition manifested itself in the declaration of a climate emergency by Reading 
Borough Council, on behalf of the wider community, in February 2019, in a resolution 
which set out the steps necessary to reach the overall goal.
The climate emergency declaration explicitly recognised that the ambitious target of 
net zero by 2030 ‘can only be achieved with substantial policy changes from national 
government’, highlighting the need, in particular, for more government support for:
• Retro-fitting private and public housing to low/no carbon standards
• Renewable electricity and heat
• Smart energy technology, local energy storage and connections  
to local power grids
• Electric vehicle infrastructure and scrappage of older vehicles
• Cycling, walking and public transport
• National recycling standards for industry and supermarkets
• Food waste collection and its use for generation of local, green energy
• Town centre district energy systems to harness heat from local rivers/watercourses
• Widespread deployment of ground-source and air-source heat pumps
• Local authority procurement powers to require the delivery of net zero carbon 
strategies by suppliers of third party servicesAs we embark on the journey to a net zero carbon Reading by 2030, reductions in 
emissions are unlikely to reduce by the same amount every year. If the Government 
policy changes referred to above are not forthcoming within the lifetime of this 
strategy (2020-25), then the gains required to reach net zero in the latter part of the 
decade will obviously need to be greater. However, by calculating what the average 
annual emissions reduction for Reading would need to be to achieve net zero by 2030, 
we can give ourselves a benchmark against which progress towards that longer-term 
goal can be judged. This benchmark does not represent an annual target but will 
indicate how far we have to go to achieve the goal of net zero by 2030.
3.3 Preparing Reading for the impacts of climate change
The Reading Climate Change Partnership commissioned a first adaptation plan for 
Reading in February 20207. This is not a detailed action plan, rather, it indicates 
headline climate impacts for Reading by the end of the century, describing the big 
picture risks alongside the opportunities for the town to adapt. It sets out key steps  
for consideration in each category of adaptation and recommends a number of areas 
of work to advance the development of Reading’s Adaptation Plan. 
It is a good introduction to adaptation planning, with very much a Reading focus. 
Headline climate change impacts for each of the six themes set out in Section 5 of 
the strategy have been considered in development of the strategy. These include ‘low 
regret’ and ‘win-win’ options. There is more for us to pick up on and lots of reference 
information: including links to other Adaptation Planning documents. There is also 
advice for us to consider in relation to future governance of Adaptation Planning  
in Reading, which is something we can develop over the next few years.
The Reading Climate Change Adaptation Plan highlights the key stages which  
we need to progress through in Reading to become more resilient to the impacts  
of climate change as follows:
Fig 4:  Key stages for effective planning to adapt to climate change impactsCapacity and PartnershipsLeadership and Governance
Act nowImplement low-regret and win-win  
options to enhance resilience
Make plansPlan for larger investments 
to address the bigger risks
Learn moreAddress long-term 
research needs
7 See Reading Climate Change Adaptation Plan,  https://readingcan.org.uk/our-plan/adaptation 11
3.4 The benefits of taking action on climate change
The science is clear that taking urgent action to reduce emissions is a practical 
imperative. But there is also much to be gained from doing so as an integral part 
of the wider Reading 2050 vision for a ‘smart and sustainable’ Reading8. Since the 
publication of the Stern report in 2006 on the economic impacts of climate change, it 
has been well understood that the benefits of action to reduce emissions considerably 
outweigh the costs. While the challenges associated with reaching the net zero by 
2030 target in Reading will be significant, so will be the benefits.
Economic Social Environmental
Clean and inclusive 
growth in the local 
economy
Reduced energy costs
Increased energy security
High quality employment 
Reduced congestion 
New opportunities in the 
low carbon economy
Economic costs of 
climate impacts  
avoided/reducedMore active, outdoor 
lifestyles
Healthier diets
Warmer, healthier homes
Quieter, safer streets
Vulnerable people 
protected locally and 
globally
More cohesive, engaged 
communities
Improved physical and 
mental healthImproved air quality
Better access to 
greenspace and nature
Healthier water 
Improved biodiversity
Reduced risk of flooding, 
heatwaves and extremes
Global environment 
safeguarded for future 
generations
Table 2:  Benefits of taking action on climate changeOne of the striking features of the public consultation on the draft Reading Climate 
Emergency Strategy which took place between March and June 2020 was the large 
number of positive benefits from taking action on climate change highlighted by those 
who responded. Residents and organisations who responded to the consultation cited 
in particular the potential for action on climate change to:
• Improve community cohesion – by bringing communities together, reducing 
inequalities, encouraging personal responsibility and respect for each other and 
the environment
• Deliver health benefits – e.g. the physical health benefits associated with more 
active, less car dependent lifestyles
• Offer global benefits – including reduced climate impacts on poorer countries 
and reduction in the forces driving mass migration and refugees
• Improve mental health – directly from addressing anxiety about the future and 
indirectly as a result of healthier lifestyles
• Benefit future generations – reduced risks to younger people who will have to 
live with the impacts of a changing climate as a result of today’s emissions
• Stimulate new economic/employment opportunities – opportunities to develop 
new products, services, jobs and skills in the ‘green economy’
• Improve connection with nature – bringing us closer to nature, recognising our 
place in it, respecting it and recognising the contribution which nature can make 
to tackling climate challenges.
8 See Reading 2050 Vision, https://livingreading.co.uk/reading-2050 12
Responses to the consultation also highlighted to a lesser extent benefits such as 
learning/educational opportunities; improved resilience; improved food security; 
reduced pollution; reduced waste; lower/more stable energy costs; stronger local 
supply chains; safer streets; improved biodversity; and improved quality of life. 
Taking action on climate change will also deliver on multiple fronts – so called  
‘win-win’ solutions, as illustrated in the diagram below.
Fig 4:  Example of the benefits of improving domestic energy efficiency  
to different sectors9
9 https://www.imperial.ac.uk/media/imperial-college/grantham-institute/public/publications/briefing-papers/Co-benefits-of-climate-change-mitigation-in-the-UK.pdf
“Reduced impact on other countries”
“Setting a better example to our children
about how important the environment is”“A better future for our
children and grandchildren”
“Increased satisfaction/pride in Reading and
recognition of it being a dynamic place to live”
“The economic benefits in stimulating
local green energy technologies”
“Increased opportunities
for technical/IT innovation”
“A brilliant modern town for our
children to be proud to call home”“Greater social cohesion
around this action plan”
“People feel less worried about climate change
and good about doing something positive”Reduced energy 
demand, carbon 
reductionReduced  
cold-related illnesses, 
reduced NHS  
costsBetter quality 
housing stock, 
reduced operating 
costs for housing 
providersGrowth of 
energy efficiency 
industry, job creation, 
fewer illness-
related days lost at 
work, improved 
productivity
Environment Health Housing Business & Economy
EnvironmentHealth
HousingBusiness  
& Economy
ENERGY  
EFFICIENCYReduced 
energy demand, 
carbon reduction, 
reduced cold-related 
illnesses, reduced NHS costs, 
better quality housing stock, 
reduced operating costs for housing 
providers, fewer illness-related 
days lost at work, improved 
productivity, growth of 
energy efficiency 
industry, job 
creation.Voices of Reading: A selection of quotes 
from contributors to our consultation
 13
4. Reading’s Pathway to Net Zero by 2030 
4.1 Reading’s energy demand and priorities  
on the pathway to net zero
Achieving the net zero carbon target for Reading will require the removal of virtually all 
fossil fuels from the energy mix. Key priorities in this regard have been identified as:
• Housing (retrofitting and building new homes and other buildings to low/
zero carbon standards): we need to reduce energy demand in domestic and 
commercial properties via ‘deep retrofit’ of existing property, and ensure that 
new property is constructed to net zero standards
• Renewable energy (generating more energy from renewable sources): we need 
more green energy, particularly from local sources, to ensure that the increased 
demand for electricity which will arise as we move away from gas is met from 
low/zero carbon sources – an increase of approximately 10-15 times the current 
level of renewable energy generation is needed
• Transport (de-carbonising transport systems): we need to reduce traffic and the 
need to travel by more polluting modes of transport, encourage a switch to low/
zero carbon modes of transport, and support the phased replacement of petrol/
diesel vehicles with electric vehicles
• Consumption and waste: we need to buy and use less ‘stuff’, reduce waste 
generation overall, increase recycling and develop Reading’s ‘circular economy’ in 
which waste will be treated as a resource
• Nature-based solutions: improved management of greenspace and the water 
environment in Reading also offers scope to reduce carbon emissions as natural 
areas can act as ‘carbon sinks’. This will also have the advantage of helping 
the town adapt to the impacts of a changing climate by mitigating flood risk, 
reducing the urban heat island effect, improving air quality and enhancing health 
and well-being. 
At the other end of the technology spectrum, Reading will need to embrace Smart 
energy technology to accomodate a radically different pattern of local demand for, 
and supply of, energy. Significant investment is already going into making Reading a 
‘Smart and sustainable city’ so ensuring this investment supports the net zero objective 
will be important.
Across all of these priorities, effective communication with and engagement of the wider 
public will be critical to the success of our efforts to deliver the aims of the strategy. 
Further details of our plans to achieve this are included in section 6 of the strategy.4.2  The pathway to net zero in numbers for energy use  
in the built environment
In order to establish the feasibility of a net zero carbon Reading we modelled the 
maximum conceivable action possible with existing technology, putting aside cost and 
other barriers for the purposes of the assessment, to calculate:
• The potential to reduce energy demand with ‘deep retrofit’ of the borough’s 
housing stock and commercial buildings, plus deployment of LED lighting and 
AAA+ appliances 
• The potential for renewable energy generation using existing or foreseeable 
technologies and an initial assessment of available opportunities
• The additional electricity demand generated for electrification of heat and 
transport as we move away from fossil fuels
• The gap which would remain when all the above are taken into account
These calculations are summarised in table 3. Achieving the demand reductions and 
renewable energy generation shown would require a massive investment beyond the 
means of any one agency in Reading – to give just one example, the estimated cost 
of retrofitting domestic property is approximately £30,000 per house. This is one of 
the areas which Reading’s climate emergency declaration therefore highlighted would 
require national government policy changes and resources to support the achievement 
of a net zero target. 
The key projects set out in this strategy will help to stimulate the shift to zero carbon 
energy infrastructure in Reading. Key examples are further installation of solar panels, 
the installation of heat pumps that use renewable energy from rivers and ground 
source, the establishment of district heating network(s), bringing forward of the 
adoption of electric vehicles and the necessary local charging facilities and the uptake 
of housing and business retrofit projects. The initial projects outlined in the strategy 
will not in themselves be sufficient to deliver the zero carbon aim but they will help to 
drive a greater uptake in these areas and enable an acceleration to achieve our end 
goal as we approach 2030.
Total Reading energy demand +1889 GWh
Total potential demand reduction (gas and electricity) -933 GWh
Total potential for renewable energy generation -846 GWh
Additional load for electrified heating and transport +315 GWh
Gap remaining 424 GWh
Table 3:  Potential to reduce Reading’s energy demand and generate  
renewable energy  14
4.3  Decarbonising power supply and the need  
for Reading to ‘go electric’
Emissions from UK power stations have fallen by 60% since 199010 and the ‘carbon 
intensity’ of grid energy is expected to fall still further as more low carbon energy 
is generated. A key part of the pathway to net zero is therefore for Reading to ‘go 
electric’: taking advantage of ‘greener’ grid energy; generating our own energy 
from local renewable sources; storing this so that it can be used at peak times; and 
deploying smart technology to make the best use of energy when it is most cost-
effective. Reliance on electricity and technology to reach net zero will not be enough: 
we need to be reducing the amount of energy and other resources we use; drastically 
cutting the amount of ‘stuff’ we consume; changing our travel patterns and habits; 
adopting healthier, lower carbon lifestyles; and working with our natural assets to 
combat both the causes and impacts of a changing climate. The action plans in 
Section 5 set out how we can achieve this in more detail.
4.4  Lessons from the COVID-19 pandemic
A few days after the launch of public consultation on this strategy in March 2020, 
the UK went into a national ‘lockdown’ as part of the response to the COVID-19 
pandemic. Its wide-ranging impacts caused policy-makers across the world to re-assess 
their priorities and plans to address this and other strategic challenges facing the 
world today.
It is notable that a global pandemic featured at the top of the UK’s national risk 
register prior to the COVID-19 crisis, yet, when the risk materialised, the country 
appeared to be poorly prepared in many key respects. Extreme weather events sit not 
far below a global pandemic on the same risk register. Perhaps the first lesson we 
can learn from COVID-19 therefore is that we should not be complacent about the 
chances of worst-case scenarios coming to fruition. This underlines the urgency of our 
efforts both to reduce the emissions which are causing climate change, and to adapt 
to climate change impacts.
Many cities have already used the impetus of COVID-19 to re-think ‘business as usual’ 
models. For example, we have seen city leaders across the world using the lockdown 
to implement measures which encourage cycling and walking (for example, London, 
Milan, Mexico City, Paris, Bogota and New York) and even ambitions to re-design city 
economies (Amsterdam).Nevertheless, the lessons to be learnt from COVID-19 and our response to it at 
individual, community, local and national level are varied and complex. In advice to 
the Government issued in May 2020, however, the UK Committee on Climate Change 
successfully distilled them down into six principles which it has highlighted as being 
key to ‘a resilient recovery’. These are:
• Using climate investments to support the economic recovery and jobs
• Leading a shift towards positive long-term behaviours
• Tackling the wider ‘resilience deficit’ on climate change
• Embedding fairness and the idea of a ‘just transition’ as a core principle
• Ensuring the recovery does not ‘lock-in’ greenhouse gas emissions or increase risk
• Strengthening incentives to reduce emissions when considering fiscal changes
10 https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/energy-and-emissions-projections
  15
The Committee subsequently elaborated on its advice to Government by setting out 
five clear investment priorities for the economic recovery:
• Low carbon retrofits and buildings that are fit for the future: the Committee 
highlighted new employment and reskilling opportunities if Governments support 
a national plan to renovate buildings and construct new housing to the highest 
standards of energy and water efficiency, to begin the shift to low carbon 
heating systems, and to protect against overheating.
• Tree planting, peatland restoration, and green infrastructure: the Committee 
highlighted the scope for investing in nature, including in towns and cities, to 
create opportunities for highly-skilled employment, and outcomes that improve 
people’s lives. Such investment, the Committee argued, will bring significant 
benefits for the climate, biodiversity, air quality, and flood prevention.
• Energy networks must be strengthened for the net zero energy transformation 
in order to support electrification of transport and heating: the Committee 
argued that Government has the regulatory tools to bring forward private sector 
investment and that new hydrogen and carbon capture and storage (CCS) 
infrastructure will provide a route to establishing new low carbon industries. The 
Committee also pointed out that fast-tracking electric vehicle charging points will 
hasten the move towards a full phase out of petrol and diesel cars and vans by 
2032 or earlier.
• Infrastructure to make it easy for people to walk, cycle, and work remotely: the 
Committee called for dedicated safe spaces for walking and cycling, more bike 
parking and support for shared bikes and e-scooters to help the nation get back 
to work in a more sustainable way, accompanied by resilient digital technology 
(5G and fibre broadband).
• Moving towards a circular economy: the Committee called for not only an 
increase in reuse and recycling rates but also an end to sending biodegradable 
wastes to landfill within the next five years, specifically highlighting the need to 
support local authorities to invest in separated waste collections and recycling 
infrastructure and to create new regional jobs.The Committee also spelt out the opportunities to support the transition to a more 
sustainable economic recovery by investing in the UK’s workforce, and in lower-carbon 
behaviours and innovation via:
• Reskilling and retraining programmes: the Committee set out how the net zero 
economy will require a net zero workforce, able to install smart low carbon 
heating systems and to make homes comfortable; and to design, manufacture 
and use low carbon products and materials.
• Leading a move towards positive behaviours: the Committee argued there  
is a window for Government to reinforce the ‘climate-positive’ behaviours that 
have emerged during the lockdown, including increased remote working, cycling 
and walking.
• Targeted science and innovation funding: the Committee called for a kick-
start for research and innovation in low carbon and adaptation technologies 
which will facilitate the changes needed in the decades ahead and build UK 
competitive advantage.
The Reading Climate Change Partnership endorses the advice offered by the 
Committee on Climate Change and has sought to ensure that these insights 
have informed the final version of this Strategy.
11 https://www.theccc.org.uk/publication/reducing-uk-emissions-2020-progress-report-to-parliament/Achieving the UK’s climate goals and rebuilding 
the economy fit naturally together. Each makes 
the other possible. Success demands that we 
do both. The actions recommended by the CCC 
will deliver an improved economy, better public 
health, improved biodiversity and access to 
nature, cleaner air, more comfortable homes and 
highly productive and rewarding employment.
Committee on Climate Change, Reducing UK Emissions:   
Progress Report to Parliament11
 16
5. Delivering the Strategy
5.1 The role of the Reading Climate Change Partnership  
and other partners
In developing the Reading Climate Emergency Strategy, the Reading Climate Change 
Partnership has engaged a wide range of organisations, sectors and groups.
The Partnership Board sits at the head of a wider Reading Climate Action Network 
which includes an extensive range of voluntary sector bodies, community groups and 
individuals, between which there is a strong track record of effective collaboration. 
A new Business Climate Action Network was also recently established to inspire and 
support action in the commercial sector. As such there is a long-standing tradition in 
Reading of partnership working across climate change, sustainability, health, nature, 
the arts and beyond. 
The Partnership produced Reading’s first climate change strategy in 2008 and a second 
in 2013. While the Partnership has a role in co-ordinating strategy development, 
advocating for implementation and monitoring progress, it is not in itself a delivery 
body – the responsibility for delivery sits with the partners who are identified in the 
strategy as owning individual actions.
5.2 Resources for strategy implementation
Some of the actions included in the action plans below, and the scale and pace at 
which they can be progressed, will be subject to the prevailing national policy context 
and/or the provision of additional powers and resources by central government, as 
made clear in Reading’s climate emergency declaration. This does not mean we are 
not committed to them – on the contrary, we see them as key to achieving the net 
zero target – it is simply to reflect the reality that the delivery partners in Reading 
alone cannot solve some of the bigger challenges we face.
The resources of the Reading Climate Change Partnership are limited, and it will be 
vital for all delivery partners to bring forward plans which enable the actions set out in 
the strategy to be delivered and to set these in the context of their own organisational 
plans. This process is underway, with several key partners in Reading already 
committing to make their own organisations net zero carbon by 2030 and/or setting 
out the investment needed to achieve this goal. For example:
• Reading Borough Council has developed a new Carbon Plan for the period 2020-
25, designed to deliver an 85% reduction in the Council’s emissions by 2025 
as a key milestone en route to net zero by 2030. In the two full financial years 
since the climate emergency was declared (2019/20 and 2020/21), the Council 
committed c.£34 million to capital projects in transport, waste and energy which 
will contribute directly to carbon reduction.
Photo: Sam Jean
  17• The University of Reading has reduced its carbon footprint by 40% since 2008/09 
through a programme of investment which has delivered £30 million in cumulative 
revenue savings since 2011. In 2019 alone over 500 individual solar panels were 
installed at University campuses.
• Thames Water has committed to making its operations net zero carbon by 2030 
and invested in a shift towards self-generated renewable energy from sewage, 
wind and solar power which currently meet over 20% of its electricity needs.  
The company recently began sourcing 100% of its remaining electricity needs  
from external renewable energy generation, supplied via a Power Purchase 
Agreement with a ‘green tariff’ energy supplier.
• The Environment Agency has set itself the aim of becoming a net zero organisation 
by 2030. It will seek to meet the goal by reducing the emissions of its own activities 
and supply chain by 45%, with the remaining emissions addressed through tree 
planting or other measures. The Agency will also explore whether it could become 
an absolute zero organisation – eliminating all carbon emissions from its own 
activities and supply chain – by 2050.
These are just a few examples, but we need every business and organisation in Reading 
to take responsibility for its own carbon footprint, and make the investment necessary to 
reduce it to zero. The action plans in this strategy highlight some of the ways we aim to 
support them in doing that.
As well as new resources, new financing mechanisms are likely to be needed to support 
the transition to a net zero carbon Reading. The extent of the change under way was 
indicated in the announcement by the Bank of England in December 2019 that banks 
and insurers would be subject to ‘stress tests’ based on their exposure to climate related 
risk. This could require them to hold more capital to cover the risks they are bearing, 
potentially making insurance and mortgages harder to get and more expensive for assets 
which are exposed to higher climate risks. 
As pressure for companies and pensions funds to divest from fossil fuels increases, 
and economies seek to rebuild after COVID-19, so finance could become available 
for a ‘green’ recovery and ‘clean’ growth. This illustrates how Reading’s economy and 
businesses need to be aware of, and prepared to take advantage of, the economic 
opportunity which will arise from the transition to a low carbon economy.
Structural changes are essential, but delivering the strategy requires changes in attitude 
and behaviours by all residents in the town as well as by the commercial sector. The 
strategy looks for changes in purchasing, management of private space, optimising 
water use and modes of transport. The network of voluntary and community groups  
in Reading will help bring about changes and disseminate the messages.5.3  Action Plans for key themes
The rest of this section of the Strategy consists of six action plans developed for key 
themes for action on climate change. The action plans set out:
• The title and intention of the action identified
• A description of the main activities envisaged and links with other themes
• Targets, measures or milestones so we can track progress and take corrective action
• Target completion dates, usually within the 5-year lifetime of the Strategy
• Details of partners to be involved in delivery
The action plans were developed by working groups which included a range of 
stakeholders. Invitations to join working groups were made at public events and no-one 
who wanted to be involved was excluded. The action plans were revised to take account 
of comments made during the public consultation process. We are conscious, however, 
that not everyone who we would like to have been engaged in the process has been 
engaged thus far. We would therefore welcome new partners coming forward to help 
deliver the actions set out below, or otherwise commit themselves to new action which 
they are prepared to take to work towards the net zero carbon objective.
 18
READING CLIMATE EMERGENCY STRATEGY:
ENERGY AND LOW CARBON  
DEVELOPMENT ACTION PLAN
Buildings and climate change
At UK level, emissions from energy consumption in buildings represent around 68% 
of the total12, with 35% coming from industrial/commercial buildings and 33% from 
domestic properties, with the remainder from transport. In Reading, the equivalent 
figure is 79%, with an almost equal split between industrial/commercial and domestic. 
The vast majority of building emissions come from electricity (where they are typically 
generated at power stations) and gas (which is piped to homes and businesses directly). 
Reducing emissions from buildings requires insulating homes and businesses, using 
energy efficient devices and appliances and generating more renewable energy.
Gas, oil, petrol and diesel are fossil fuels and therefore have a high carbon footprint. 
Whilst electricity generated using fossil fuels has even higher carbon emissions, 
recent reductions in the ‘carbon intensity’ of electricity in the UK and the planned 
continuation of this through further investment in renewable energy generation makes 
electrification of heat and transport a key strategy for the UK.13,14 
Significant additional demands for electricity must be mitigated by reducing wasted 
energy and through harnessing local renewable energy resources. 
The UK’s energy infrastructure is exposed to the impacts of a changing climate and 
Reading is no exception. In the coming decades we can expect: 
• Disruption of power networks impacting on wellbeing and the local economy
• Flood risk to energy infrastructure and networks
• Heavy rain/high winds leading to more impacts on networks such as through 
pylons and local power networks 
• Risk of high loads and changing power use patterns from hot and/or  
unusual weather 
• Increased discomfort in buildings where air conditioning fails 
• Urban heat island effects becoming exacerbated by more air conditioning, 
generating and exhausting heat
• More positively, a warmer climate could lead to lower heating requirements during 
the winter months which could reduce carbon emissions associated with this source
12 https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/790626/2018-provisional-emissions-statistics-report.pdf
13 https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/766109/decarbonising-heating.pdf
14 https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/739460/road-to-zero.pdf 19
Progress to date
Reading has had a lot of new development which means that more efficient buildings are 
being constructed as building regulations and planning requirements drive higher standards: 
• Lighting in many newer properties and streetlighting are now LED, which use 
much less power 
• Newer buildings have been built to higher standards than the national 
regulations through local planning standards
• Renewable energy generation has been a priority for the Council which owns 
and operates over 7500 solar panels in the town
• The Council has upgraded its council housing, which represents over 10% of the 
town’s housing, to a good energy efficiency standard 
• Early adoption of ‘smart city’ technology in Reading has potential to support 
efforts to reduce emissions in future
Reading has seen a significant reduction in emissions associated with buildings since 
2005, with data from 2018 showing a 52% reduction in per capita emissions.
Priorities on the pathway to net zero for energy  
and low carbon development
To achieve the target of a net zero carbon Reading by 2030 will require: 
• Substantial reductions in heat loss from buildings through a major retrofitting 
programme for Reading
• The electrification of transport and heat (as opposed to fossil fuels)
• An order of magnitude increase in renewable heat and electricity generation 
• The use of smart technologies such as batteries and varied time of power use
Reducing demand is the first step in achieving a zero carbon future. New developments 
are built to a higher standard but it will be important to reach the zero carbon standards 
set out in Reading’s Local Plan. While ensuring that new development does not add to 
Reading’s carbon footprint is vital, perhaps more important is the retrofitting of existing 
buildings that were built to a lower standard but which will remain in place for a long 
time to come. Many of these have solid walls and may be protected heritage buildings 
with high heat losses and are more difficult to insulate. Such buildings can cause social 
and health risks for those who struggle to afford to heat them and who may find 
themselves in ‘fuel poverty’ as a result. Reading has thus far installed solar panels on only a fraction of its roof spaces. With 
solar PV (photo-voltaic) panels costing significantly less than a few years ago, Reading 
should quickly move to install solar panels onto viable roof spaces.
Reading must quickly build its local skills base and bring forward a step change in 
retrofitting buildings. In order to retrofit all the homes in Reading, a total of 17 houses 
per day would need to be completed. Modelling work shows that if housing could be 
lifted to an EPC ‘B’ rating, there would still be a significant amount of clean energy 
generation needed to bring the gap between that and zero carbon. Previous schemes 
have shown that householders and business owners will be unlikely to act without 
significant incentives and availability of finance, so this must be made available locally, 
especially for those least able to afford it, if Reading is to succeed. 
Reading must also increase its local capacity to install energy reduction and renewable 
energy solutions and stimulate the market in low carbon products and services. There 
is a need to work closely with the energy companies to plan a low carbon energy 
future. Significant infrastructure projects need to develop quickly to enable a net 
zero carbon target to be achieved by 2030 through a new ‘energy master plan’ for 
Reading. This plan will map out a technology pathway and seek to establish financially 
sustainable ways to deliver the energy infrastructure needed which ensures energy 
is affordable. Supporting the local economy through local ownership of energy 
assets and local supply chain development are also important. Major town centre 
developments will need to be serviced by, and will form part of, a district green 
energy network which accesses local renewable heat reserves which are likely to 
predominantly be from the ground and local water courses as these are the most 
prevalent source of renewable heat in Reading. Clusters of houses and businesses will 
benefit from collective renewable heat and electricity generation equipment.
The choices we all make about how we use power will be a critical success factor in 
meeting the ambition for a net zero carbon Reading by 2030. Technology can help us 
and the smart city approaches that will allow us to easily control the way we utilise 
our local renewable energy to power our transport and buildings will also be vital. 
Minimising energy losses through distribution and transmission will be a further priority. 
Key adaptation priorities for energy and the built environment
As we make an energy transition we need to consider the impacts of climate change 
and how they will change our needs in terms of buildings and transport and our newly 
developing local energy infrastructure. We will need to work carefully with our local 
environment and use it with care to help us meet our low carbon energy needs. New 
risks to the existing power distribution system will also need to be carefully managed. 
Risks relating to overheating in Reading’s property also needs to be carefully considered.
 20
Energy and Low Carbon Development Action Plan:  our aim is that by 2025 Reading is taking urgent action to decarbonise its energy networks, increase energy efficiency and 
create renewable energy capacity. It has concrete plans to achieve sufficient demand reduction to enable its annual energy needs to be 100% covered by its renewable generation, 
taking account of the increased load from transport and heat becoming electrically powered. 
NB: Some of the actions included in the action plans below, and the scale and pace at which they can be progressed, will be subject to the prevailing national policy context and/or 
the provision of additional powers and resources by central government, as made clear in Reading’s climate emergency declaration (see section 3.2 above).
Sub Category: Energy Policy
Action name Description Targets and measure/milestone Target  
completion dateDelivery partners
E1 
An Energy Master Plan 
for Reading »Develop an Energy Master Plan for Reading Develop stakeholder group Q4 2020 Scottish and Southern 
Energy (District Network 
Operator) 
Southern Gas Networks
Ovo Energy 
Octopus Energy 
Local renewable  
energy suppliers
Spirit Solar 
Reading Energy  
Strategy Forum Establish evidence base and  
technology pathwayQ2 2021
Develop cross sector  
implementation planQ2 2021
E2 
Energy Efficiency in 
New developmentIntroduce high standards of energy efficiency for new development
 »Large commercial to BREEAM ‘excellent’ standard with best methods employed 
 »Larger housing developments built to zero carbon standards 
 »Ensure standards post construction with best methods employed 
 »Build new council housing to the highest standards. Net zero carbon and 
exceeding 50% reduction on building regulations
 »Consider the embodied energy in building materials in publicly commissioned projects% achieving standard Ongoing Reading Borough Council
Schemes supported though offset
E3 
Energy Reduction 
through Retrofit 
ProgrammeEstablish a housing retrofit programme in Reading which is compelling  
for property owners:
 »Apply for funding
 »Compile high quality information on stock and energy efficiency  
levels of local housing
 »Identify partners
 »Zero carbon offset 
 »Investigate green/community bonds and other finance innovation 
 »Commercial retrofit schemeApply MHCLG Local Authority Delivery 
funding Sept to Dec 20
 »Stock condition survey Oct 20
 »Supply chain development work TBC 
 »Collect Section 106 funds for zero 
carbon development
 »Work with LEP and Reading UK 
to establish companies to pilot – 
scheme TBC2020/21 Reading Borough Council
English Heritage
South East Centre for  
the Built Environment
University of Reading
 21
Action name Description Targets and measure/milestone Target  
completion dateDelivery partners
E4 
Retrofit DesignEstablish standards for climate-conscious retrofit (not exhaustive):
 »Develop/utilise standards for different property types
- Heritage sympathetic measures e.g. Heritage England Energy efficiency guide
- Consider design guides such as Passivhaus Energyphit
- Use PAS 2035 where possible
- Design for climate risks (e.g.overheating/flooding)
- Consider embodied energy in material using LETI guide  
https://www.leti.london/ (also design guide)
- Introduce water saving especially hot water
 »Develop public communication and resources for retrofit
Links: Water, BusinessIdentify pilot projects which target 
specific solutions for different building 
types locally2020 to 2022 Reading Borough Council
English Heritage
SECBE
University of Reading
E5 
Behaviours that save 
energy in homes and 
businesses and schools »Develop approaches to reduce energy consumption in homes,  
businesses and schools 
 »Create information resources
 »Develop targeted behaviour-change campaign
Links: Community, Business, schoolsPublish resources 2020/21 National/local agencies and 
organisations materials and 
resources
Reading Borough Council
Reading Climate  
Change Partnership  
Brighter Futures Targeted campaign 2021/2022
E6 
Best in class buildings »Develop high standard projects in different sectors, to reduce emissions
Links: BusinessPublish reports on buildings Q2 2021 Housing providers
E7 
Reducing fuel poverty »Continue to provide Winter Watch service 
 »Support new schemes targeting retrofitting for those most in need
 »Build referral mechanisms for those suffering from poor health and/or fuel poverty
Links: Community, HealthReading Housing Strategy 2020/21 Reading Borough Council
Other agencies  
(Health, Citizen  
Advice etc.)Design new approaches 2020/22
Establish cross-referral programme Ongoing
E8 
Leadership and 
Influence »Consider legal options for establishing standards that go higher than regulations
 »Buy sustainable LCGES (Low Carbon Goods and Environmental Services) from 
local suppliers to build supply chains where rules allow
 »Use social value KPIs 
 »Develop in-house skills for retrofit of Council housingConsider trials nationally Q3 2020 Reading Borough Council
Reading UK 
Thames Valley Berkshire 
Local Enterprise PartnershipProject to work with public and private 
sector to build local supply chain2021 to 2023
E9 
Reading Borough 
Council Carbon Plan 
2020 to 2025Reading Borough Council to set out plan to achieve emissions reductions and 
renewable energy generation targetsPublished plan to 2025 and meet its 
milestonesQ4 2020 Reading Borough Council
 22
Action name Description Targets and measure/milestone Target  
completion dateDelivery partners
E10 
Publish new housing 
strategy to incorporate 
energy retrofitNew strategy to include C-rating and where possible B rating for all Council and 
rental accommodation in borough by 2030
Link: Businessi) New housing strategy 2020/21 Reading Borough Council
ii) Implementation 2021 onwards
Sub category: Renewable Energy – Heat
Action name Description Targets and measure/milestone Target  
completion dateDelivery partners
E11 
Renewable Heat  
Ground SourceWork with developers to maximise district energy solutions in line with Local Plan 
policies on decentralised energy: 
 »Establish District Heating 
 »Investigate the potential of rivers, ground and aquifers in Reading for renewable 
heat
 »Implement heat pump schemes
 »Develop skills of local installers
Link: BusinessComplete studies Q2 2020 Reading Borough Council
Department for Business, 
Energy and Industrial 
Strategy
University of ReadingImplement scheme Q2 2022 (dependant  
on developers)
E12 
Renewable Heat  
Air Source Consider different types of heat pumps and develop skills of local installers
Link: Business Report on Air Source Heat Pumps Q3 2020 Reading Borough Council
Identify installers Q3 2020
Conduct trials Q2 2021
E13 
Renewable Heat  
Anaerobic Digestion  »Anaerobic digestion for food waste streams 
 »Consider biogas generation for buses and inject to grid
Links: Resources, TransportReport informing waste strategy Q2 2021 University of Reading
E14 
HydrogenInvestigate renewably sourced hydrogen fuel cell technology in particular for use in 
Heavy Commercial Vehicles (HCVs)
Links: Business, TransportIdentify schemes/trials Date TBC Reading Borough Council
Reading UK
Reading Transport
Southern Gas Networks Investigate hydrogen injection to gas network Discussions with SGN
 23
Sub category: Renewable Energy – Electricity 
Action name Description Targets and measure/milestone Target  
completion dateDelivery partners
E15 
Solar PV (commercial)Establish large commercial roof-based schemes that service base loads in large 
commercial buildings
Link: BusinessEstablish scheme 2020/22 Reading Borough Council
University of Reading
Reading UK
TVBLEP
SE Energy HubAchieve high proportion of suitable roofs 2025
E16 
Solar PV (domestic)Establish phase 1 of domestic scheme using bulk purchase to reduce price Develop scheme 2020 RCCP
Tenants groups
local companiesScheme up and running 2022
E17 
Solar PV  
(Public buildings 
including schools)Install solar panels onto public buildings including housing, community buildings, 
schools, hospitals, leisure centres, police and fire authoritiesCouncil target 50% of electricity from 
renewables (mainly solar)2025 RBC
NHS
Police
Fire authorities
E18 
Renewable Energy 
HydroTo bring forward Hydro-electric power schemes powered by Reading’s rivers 
To publicise sustainable energy through educational programme
Link: WaterPlanning approval secured already, 
investment and commence scheme2020/21 Reading Hydro
Launch educational programme, tours etc 2022
E19 
Investment in 
Renewable Energy at 
Regional level Consider investment in land and sites in and outside of Reading that have potential 
to supply renewable electricity to Reading 
Investigate suitable land with (potential) planning and connections for renewable 
energy generationInitial report by Q2 2021 Reading Borough Council
Sub category: Electric Powered Transport. See also Transport Theme Action Plan
Action name Description Targets and measure/milestone Target  
completion dateDelivery partners
E20 
Energy strategy for Bus 
Depot and surrounding 
area »Establish potential for solar – depot, car park canopies, Civitas School 
 »Investigate Riding Sunbeams option for direct connection to railway network  Report 2020/21 Reading Borough Council
Reading Community Energy 
Society
 24
Sub category: Electricity Storage, Management and Metering – Smart Cities Solutions
Action name Description Targets and measure/milestone Target  
completion dateDelivery partners
E21 
Battery Storage »Grid side battery storage by Local Energy company (District Network Operator)
 »Behind meter storage on domestic and commercial sites
 »Specialist large scale storage facilities third party Establish energy strategy group 2020 SSE
Public Sector
Private sectorDevelop energy strategy draft Q2 2021
E22 
Smart Meters »Roll out of smart meters in households
 »Identify ’Internet of Things’ solutions linked to smart meters
 »Explore linkages to ‘time of use’ tariffs (different rates for different times of day) 
linked to IoT devices and ‘vehicle to grid’ (vehicles powering buildings)
 »Establish trials with vehicles/buildings and local network
Links: Business, TransportEnergy company schedules/targets 2020 to 2024 Energy Companies
University of Reading
RCCP
E23 
Internet of Things 
projects  »Introduction of in-building solutions for projects that use the cloud and smart 
response approaches including machine learning to optimise energy flowsSmart Cities projects  2020 to 2022 Reading Borough Council
University of Reading 
E24 
Heat storage  »Investigate the potential of natural and engineering based heat storage systems 
in urban context for stabilising heat supply and balancing summer storage and 
winter loadsSet up energy working group  TBC TBC 
E25 
Carbon intensity 
research  »Work with University and or third parties to develop accurate real time 
assessment of carbon intensity of electricity and optimise energy flows to 
minimise carbon emissionsSet up energy working group TBC Reading Borough Council
University of Reading 
 25
READING CLIMATE EMERGENCY STRATEGY:
TRANSPORT THEME ACTION PLAN
Transport and climate change
At UK level, emissions from road transport represent around 33% of the total15. 
In Reading, the equivalent figure is just over 20%. As well as carbon emissions, 
pollutants from vehicles are a major source of air quality problems in the town. Taking 
action to reduce emissions from transport therefore offers scope to improve public 
health, reduce congestion, stimulate low carbon sectors of the local economy and 
improve the quality of life for Reading residents.
The COVID-19 ‘lockdown’ had an immediate and a profound impact on travel 
behaviour, and although the long-term impacts on future travel demand and mode 
share are difficult to predict, some changes, such as more working from home, seem 
set to endure. Our Transport theme action plan was developed before the ‘lockdown’ 
and therefore our baselines and targets may need to be reviewed as the longer-
term impact of the crisis become better understood. Reading Borough Council has, 
however, set ambitious targets for walking and cycling and is implementing a large 
number of active travel measures, including segregated facilities, in an attempt to 
ensure that positive changes in travel habits, such as more walking and cycling, are 
sustained. The ongoing success of our active travel targets will, however, be partly 
subject to Central Government funding to implement measures on a permanent basis.
Whatever happens to future transport demand, the UK’s transport infrastructure 
remains exposed to climate impacts and Reading is no exception. In the coming 
decades we can expect: 
• Disruption of transport networks impacting on wellbeing and the local economy
• Flood risk to transport infrastructure and access to key transport hubs
• Heavy rain/high winds leading to more accidents, treefall, road closures and delays
• Risk of slope/embankment failures due to heavy rain
• Risk of rails buckling, cables sagging and roads softening in extreme heat
• Increased discomfort on public transport
• Overheating/failure of signalling and communications equipment
These risks underline the importance of continuing to reduce the need to travel by 
more polluting modes of travel in the first place. More positively, a warmer climate 
may enable more outdoor lifestyles, making ‘active’ forms of travel – walking and 
cycling – more attractive.
15 https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/790626/2018-provisional-emissions-statistics-report.pdf 26
Progress to date
Investment in the transport network in recent years means that Reading currently has 
enjoyed a good level of sustainable transport provision in terms of:
• Public transport with good rail links, an extensive bus network with a modern, 
clean fleet using bio-gas fuel, fast-track public transport priority routes and the 
initial phases of an effective series of park and ride schemes
• Provision for active, sustainable modes of travel via an extended cycle network 
and a pedestrian and cycle bridge over the Thames
• Early adoption of ‘smart city’ technology which has potential to support efforts  
to reduce emissions in future
Reading has also bucked the national trend for bus use – while bus use went down 
0.7% across England in 2018/19, in Reading it rose by 4.2%. The figures mean 
bus use in Reading has increased by 40% since 2011/12. However, despite these 
advantages Reading still experiences high levels of traffic and congestion, with carbon 
emissions and air quality problems arising from this. While transport related emissions 
temporarily reduced during the peak of the COVID-19 pandemic, action is required 
to make these reductions permanent, particularly as use of public transport has been 
reduced at the same time.
Priorities on the pathway to net zero for transport
To achieve the target of a net zero carbon Reading by 2030 will require: 
• Substantial reductions in the need to travel: to be achieved through careful 
planning to locate employment, services and leisure facilities close to where 
people live, and to integrate opportunities for sustainable living, working and 
shopping in new developments
• A significant switch from cars to more sustainable modes of travel: requiring a 
shift from the most polluting modes of transport (cars, HGVs) to less polluting 
modes (public transport, walking and cycling) and from motorised transport to 
the ‘active’ modes of travel (walking and cycling) 
• Electrification of the vehicle fleet: even after reducing demand and encouraging 
modal shift, there will still be a significant need for motorised transport. As 
electricity supply is decarbonised, replacing fossil fuel-based vehicles with electric 
vehicles will be a key stage on the journey to a net zero carbon Reading
The key mechanism through which Reading’s transport future is shaped is Reading’s 
Local Transport Plan, produced by Reading Borough Council. A new Local Transport 
Plan, entitled the Reading Transport Strategy 2036, has been prepared and was the 
subject of public consultation process during 2020.Ensuring that the new transport strategy supports the ambition of achieving net zero 
carbon by 2030 will therefore be important. This is a statutory process and as such 
needs to go through a formal process before the ambitions set out in the action plan 
below can be adopted – however, Reading Borough Council has already made a 
commitment in the climate emergency declaration that the ‘forthcoming revision to 
the Local Transport Plan… reflect the urgency of this resolution’.
Beyond this, the choices we all make about how we get around will be a critical 
success factor in meeting the ambition for a net zero carbon Reading by 2030. This 
means we may all need to make difficult decisions about flying less, driving less, and 
using public transport, walking or cycling for essential journeys. If we do so, we will be 
fitter and healthier, our air will be cleaner, our public transport services will be better 
supported and more frequent, and the high cost of maintaining our roads should fall, 
freeing up resources for other much needed public services and/or further improving 
sustainable transport options.
Key adaptation issues for transport
As we make these changes, we need to prepare for increased disruption and 
damage to transport systems and infrastructure arising from climate impacts. As with 
mitigation, the best way to increase our resilience to these impacts will be to reduce 
the need to travel in the first place, with technology and digital access to information 
and services playing a key role in this. Beyond that, transport planners and operators 
need to consider individually and collectively how to make their infrastructure and 
services more resilient to the inevitable impacts of a changing climate.
 27
Transport Theme Action Plan:  Our aim is for a low carbon future for transport in which emissions are cut by reducing the need to travel by more polluting modes of transport, 
shifting more journeys to sustainable modes of transport and supporting the transition from petrol/diesel to electric vehicles. In the process, we will improve health and wellbeing, 
while making transport infrastructure more resilient to climate impacts.
NB: Some of the actions included in the action plans below, and the scale and pace at which they can be progressed, will be subject to the prevailing national policy context and/or 
the provision of additional powers and resources by central government, as made clear in Reading’s climate emergency declaration (see section 3.2 above).
Sub category: Reducing need and demand for travel, promoting walking and cycling 
Action name Description Targets and measure/milestone
(NB numerical targets subject to confirmation in final Local 
Transport Plan still in development at time of publication)Target  
completion dateDelivery partners
T1  
Reduce the need to 
travel through well 
planned development Ensure that services, leisure facilities and employment opportunities are 
located close to where people live and/or in locations easy to access by 
sustainable transport services via planning policy and decisions
Links: Business, Community, Health, Energy and LCDReduction in transport-related emissions across 
Reading
Implementation of Reading Local Plan policies2025 Reading Borough Council
Developers
T2  
Develop demand 
management measures 
to reduce traffic and 
encourage shift from 
high carbon transportConsider introduction of individual or combined policies via the 
forthcoming Local Transport Plan such as:
 »Workplace Parking Levy
 »Clean Air Zone
 »Alternative demand management measures 
Links: Business, Community, HealthInitiate consultation Q2 2020 Reading Borough Council
Local Businesses
Neighbouring Authorities
Department for Transport
Reading BIDDevelop business case for preferred option(s) 2021
Implement preferred measure(s) 2022-23
T3  
Enhance provision for 
Pedestrians and cyclists 
to encourage low 
carbon travel choicesProvide space for walking and cycling improvements, including segregation 
and road reallocation (where feasible), surface improvements, crossing 
priority, safety improvements and increased cycle parking hubs/facilities  
as set out in Local Cycling and Walking Infrastructure Plan
Links: HealthIncrease proportion of adults who walk at least 
3 times per week from 30.8% (2019) to 40% by 
2025 (en route to a 60% target by 2036)
Increase proportion of adults who cycle at least 3 
times per week from 5.1% (2019) to 9% by 2025 
(en route to a 15% target by 2036)2025 as part of the 
Local Transport Plan 
targets through to 2036Reading Borough Council
Local User Groups
Thames Valley Police
T4  
Enhance Town Centre 
and Local Centre Public 
Space to improve air 
quality and reduce 
carbon useImprove the pedestrian experience in Central Reading and local centres 
by providing better access to key destinations for walking, cycling and 
bus passengers Green up the local environment to encourage use and 
enjoyment of local facilities
Links: Business, Community, HealthIncrease active travel mode share of trips to/from 
Reading town centre from 32% (2017-2019 avg) to 
34% by 2025 (en route to a 38% target by 2036)
Increase public transport trips to/from Reading 
town centre from 44.5% mode share (2017-2019 
avg) to 45.5% mode share per day by 2025 (en 
route to a 48% target by 2036)
Decrease car trips mode share to/from Reading 
town centre from 23.5% (2017-2019 avg) to 
20.3% mode share by 2025 per day (en route  
to a 14% target by 2036)2025 as part of the 
Local Transport Plan 
targets through to 2036Reading Borough Council
Transport Operators
Reading BID
Local User Groups
Developers
Businesses
Residents
 28
Action name Description Targets and measure/milestone
(NB numerical targets subject to confirmation in final Local 
Transport Plan still in development at time of publication)Target  
completion dateDelivery partners
T5  
Promote Sustainable 
Travel to School and 
other education sites to 
encourage low carbon 
travel choicesEstablish dedicated and safe walking and cycling routes for each school.
Reduce the danger and pollution from ‘the school run’
Roll-out Play Streets/School Streets programme – supporting local 
communities and schools who want to organise street closuresIncreased shift from private car use to active travel
Improved health and fitness of schoolchildren
Improved air quality
Trial school street closures at selected schools 
before a wider roll-out across the borough2025 as part of the 
Local Transport Plan 
targets through to 2036Reading Borough Council
School Communities
Bikeability Provider
Thames Valley Police
Local User Groups
Residents
University of Reading
T6  
Improve major and 
radial routes to promote 
switch to sustainable 
modes of travelImprove the transport options on main corridors and radial routes 
including A4, A33, A327, A329, A4074, A4155 and the Inner Distribution 
Road. Make space to encourage changes in travel choice to low/zero 
carbon modes
Links: Business, Community, EducationAs per T3 and T4 2025 as part of the 
Local Transport Plan 
targets through to 2036Reading Borough Council
Neighbouring Authorities
TVB LEP
Transport Operators
Local User Groups
Residents
Businesses
T7  
Improve Quality Bus 
CorridorsImprove branded local routes with faster, more reliable and more frequent 
services, changing people’s travel habits away from dependency on cars 
especially for commuter and school journeys
Links: Business, Community, EducationIncrease bus journeys per year by 9% from 22.5M 
(2019) to 24.6M (en route to a target increase of 
25% by 2036)2025 as part of the 
Local Transport Plan 
targets through to 2036Reading Borough Council
Transport Operators
Businesses
Residents
Schools
Health Services
Department for Transport
T8  
Establish Fast-Track 
Public Transport 
CorridorsImprove speed and reliability of key public transport routes through 
establishment of key Fast-Track Public Transport (FTPT) corridors on 
strategic routes (including south, west, east and north)As per T7 2025 Reading Borough Council
Wokingham BC
West Berkshire BC
Oxfordshire CC
Transport Operators
 29
Action name Description Targets and measure/milestone
(NB numerical targets subject to confirmation in final Local 
Transport Plan still in development at time of publication)Target  
completion dateDelivery partners
T9  
Extend Park and Ride 
provision to encourage 
car users to change 
onto low carbon 
alternatives to access 
ReadingProvision of new and expanded Park & Rides to intercept traffic on main 
corridors into Reading
Links: BusinessIncreased annual number of P&R trips to/from 
Reading by 25% from 550,000 trips in 2019  
to 690,000 trips by 20252025 Reading Borough Council
Transport Operators
Royal Berks Hospital
Businesses
Wokingham Borough 
Council
Thames Valley Park
W Berks BC
Oxfordshire Borough 
Council
TVB LEP
BusinessesNew P&R at Thames Valley Park opened 2020
Winnersh Triangle P&R expanded 2021
New P&R sites identified 2025
T10  
Deliver Railway Station 
upgrades to encourage 
car users to use low 
carbon alternatives to 
and from ReadingImproved access to railway stations at Reading, Reading West and 
Tilehurst by walking, cycling and public transport. Improved customer 
experience (including fully accessible platforms), interchange and public 
space enhancements, including new and improved cycle parking hubs and 
facilitiesIncrease public transport trips to/from Reading 
town centre from 44.5% mode share (2017-2019 
avg) to 45.5% mode share per day by 2025 (en 
route to a 48% target by 2036)2025 as part of the 
Local Transport Plan 
targets through to 2036Reading Borough Council
Network Rail
Great Western Railway
TVB LEP
T11  
Open Reading Green 
Park Railway Station Provide new station for access to Green Park and South Reading and 
interchange with integrated bus services
Links: BusinessNew station completed and served  
by GWR services
Interchange open with provision  
of integrated bus services2021 Reading Borough Council
Network Rail
Great Western Railway
Transport Operators 
TVB LEP 
Department for Transport
Businesses
T12  
Implement traffic 
management schemes 
to support low carbon 
travel choicesProvide effective management of the existing network to meet changing 
mobility demands of Reading 
Provide safe roads and pavements including crossings and reduce crossing 
conflicts and interruptions to the flow of walking and cyclingAs per T4 2025 as part of the 
Local Transport Plan 
targets through to 2036Reading Borough Council
Transport Operators
Emergency Services
 30
Sub category: Reducing emissions from the vehicle fleet and using new technology
Action name Description Targets and measure/milestone
(NB numerical targets subject to confirmation in final Local 
Transport Plan still in development at time of publication)Target  
completion dateDelivery partners
T13  
Develop a zero emission 
vehicle strategy for the 
Borough »Study suitable locations 
 »Identify potential network constraints
 »Assess potential demand Strategy development to follow Local Transport 
Plan2020/21 Reading Borough Council
T14  
Decarbonise the Council 
Vehicle Fleet »Increase electric charging points at Council buildings  
 »Consider phased replacement of Council vehicles with electric 
powered units wherever possible
 »Charging points to be installed at depot that can allow vehicles to 
power buildings
 »Carbon Plan will set targets for reduction in diesel/petrolRBC Carbon Plan Q4 2020 Reading Borough Council
Feasibility report, 
Business case,  
Budget approval* (subject to above)2022-2024
T15  
Increase Public Electric 
Vehicle Charging PointsInstall electric charging points in 
 »Council car parks
 »Leisure centres
 »Lamp columns (trials) 
 »Business premises 
 »Taxi ranks 
Links: Business, TransportFirst car park project 2020/21 Reading Borough Council
Reading UK
Taxi and Private  
Hire Associations
Leisure providerAll suitable car parks 2023
First leisure centre 2020/21
All leisure centres 2022
T16  
Increase zero emission 
vehicles uptakeWork with vehicle sales outlets in Reading to increase zero emission 
vehicle uptake 
Links: BusinessZero emission vehicle uptake compared to national 
benchmarksOngoing Reading UK
Reading Climate  
Action Network 
T17  
Establish and promote 
eBikesIdentify charging locations for electrically assisted pedal cycles and 
investigate potential for e-bike hire schemeDevelop strategy for location TBC Reading Borough Council
Site owners
T18  
Planning policy for 
EV charging in new 
propertiesMonitor number of additional charging units installed in new properties 
Links: BusinessMonitor additional units in line with planning 
policyOngoing Reading Borough Council
Developers
T19  
Reduce emissions from 
the Taxi FleetRequire all taxis and private hire vehicles to be electric or hybrid by 2030 Improved air quality, reduced carbon emissions Beyond 2025 Reading Borough Council
Taxi and Private Hire 
Associations
 31
Action name Description Targets and measure/milestone
(NB numerical targets subject to confirmation in final Local 
Transport Plan still in development at time of publication)Target  
completion dateDelivery partners
T19A  
Reduce emissions and 
improve efficiency of 
freight movementsWork with the freight operators and businesses to encourage use of 
cleaner vehicle technology, consolidate deliveries, encourage ‘out of 
hours’ deliveries during quieter times and trial e-cargo bikes and freight 
consolidation parks where feasibleImproved air quality, reduced carbon emissions and 
reduced congestionBeyond 2025 Reading Borough Council
Road Haulage 
Association
Logistics UK
Freight operators and 
local businesses 
T20  
Improve Electric Vehicle 
Charging infrastructureDevelop and implement policy for appropriate provision of electric vehicle 
charging points across the boroughProvision of EV charging installed as per the policy 
to accommodate anticipated increases in demand2022 Reading Borough Council
Transport Operators
Third Party Landowners
T21  
Deploy Intelligent 
Transport Systems to 
encourage change to 
low carbon transportUse technology and real-time data to improve safety, efficiency 
environmental performance and journey experience of users of the 
transport system, particularly at signal-controlled junctionsAs per T4 2025 as part of the 
Local Transport Plan 
targets through to 2036Reading Borough Council
Transport Operators
T22  
Embrace Smart 
Solutions to reduce use 
of carbon in transportSmarter Working – maximise benefits of flexible working patterns 
including working from home (to cut transport demand) and more flexible 
working hours to encourage commuter travel outside of the peak periods
Smart City Initiatives  – use different types of electronic Internet of Things 
(IoT) sensors to collect data and then use insights gained to manage 
assets, resources and services efficiently
Implement Micromobility and Mobility-as-a-Service (MaaS) schemes 
as they evolve to facilitate shift from personally-owned modes of 
transportation towards mobility provided as a service, combining public 
and private transportation services through a unified gateway that 
manages the trip, which users can pay for with a single account
Links: BusinessDecrease car trips mode share to/from Reading 
town centre from 23.5% (2017-2019 avg)  
to 20.3% mode share by 2025 per day (en route  
to a 14% target by 2036
Reduced need for car ownership across the 
borough2025 as part of the 
Local Transport Plan 
targets through to 2036Reading Borough Council
Employers
Transport Operators
Emergency Services
Highways England
Motoring Organisations
Department for Transport
Car Clubs
 32
Action name Description Targets and measure/milestone
(NB numerical targets subject to confirmation in final Local 
Transport Plan still in development at time of publication)Target  
completion dateDelivery partners
T23a (General) :  
Develop education, 
initiatives, promotion 
and advice to 
encourage low carbon 
travel choicesUndertake marketing activities promoting sustainable transport, including 
national events such as Bike Week, Clean Air Day, In Town Without My Car 
Day, and organising local events and activities
Enable access to any adults who want to undertake Bikeability training. 
Provide courses through schools as well as to individuals and to groups
Provide up-to-date travel information to enable people to make informed 
travel choices including open data apps, real time passenger information 
and roadside Messaging Signs
Develop programme of training, education and initiatives to promote 
sustainable transport usage
Links: Education, HealthAs per T4 2025 as part of the 
Local Transport Plan 
targets through to 2036Reading Borough Council
Stakeholders
School Communities
Bikeability Provider
Thames Valley Police
Local User Groups
Residents
T23b (Schools) :  
Develop education, 
initiatives, promotion 
and advice to 
encourage low carbon 
travel choices in schoolRoll-out Mode-shift STARS accreditation scheme to all schools in Reading 
to recognise efforts encouraging sustainable travel
Implement School Streets, working with the schools to provide temporary 
restriction on motorised traffic at school drop-off and pick-up times 
resulting in a safer, healthier and a more pleasant environment
Enable access to anybody who want to undertake Bikeability training. 
Provide courses through schools as well as to individuals and to groups
Links: Education, HealthAchieve 50% of all schools accredited to at least 
Bronze by 2025
Improvements to air quality and road safety as well 
as encouraging healthier lifestyles2025 Reading Borough Council
School Communities
T24  
Research and plan 
for Carbon Reduction 
and Climate Change 
AdaptationParticipate in research programmes investigating the carbon footprint 
related to transport and the air quality impact of transport
Design climate adaptation into the planning and operation of transport 
network to improve resilience to climate change impacts
Links: AdaptationResearch completed and recommendations made 2022 Reading Borough Council
Transport operators
University of Reading
Department for Transport
Other StakeholdersClimate Change Adaptation key consideration in 
planning of all schemes2025 and beyond
 33
READING CLIMATE EMERGENCY STRATEGY:
RESOURCES THEME ACTION PLAN
Most people around the world now live in urban areas with towns and 
cities being the major drivers of carbon emissions. But cities and towns, like 
Reading, are also where people meet, mingle and innovate, and are therefore  
central to developing positive responses to climate change.
Resources, consumption and climate change 
Whether it’s a car or a sandwich, everything we buy, consume and discard has a 
carbon footprint. This may be direct, for example the energy used by electrical 
appliances, or indirect, such as the energy consumed in mining raw materials, 
shipping parts and products, fuelling production and processing items discarded as 
waste. At the other end of a product’s life, direct carbon impacts include the energy 
used to collect, transport and process waste or greenhouse gases released by the 
decomposition of biodegradable waste in landfill sites, while indirect carbon impacts 
include the need to mine more scarce virgin materials. 
In our consumer society, we have become accustomed to buying whatever we need, 
whenever we want it, and discarding or replacing it on a whim. These patterns of 
consumption are well established and deeply embedded into society; indeed, our entire 
economic model relies on them. At the same time the consequences of unbridled 
consumerism are becoming increasingly difficult to ignore. There is plenty of very visible 
evidence of how the products we consume, and the way we use and discard them, 
cause deforestation, habitat destruction, pollution and increased emissions.
The COVID-19 pandemic has also influenced our waste habits for better and for 
worse: it was reported that, as people were taking time to pre-plan shopping and be 
more creative with ingredients, food waste dropped during the lockdown16. But the 
need to wear masks in public and concerns about hygiene also led to a resurgence in 
single-use products and associated litter.
So, the question for this theme is what can we do now to ensure that succeeding 
generations have the opportunity to live well whilst using fewer scarce resources and 
creating less waste?
16 https://wrap.org.uk/content/citizens-and-food-waste-lockdown-eases
 34Progress to date 
• Reading, through its Re3 partnership, has developed excellent facilities for 
recycling plastic, paper, card, metals and glass. Recycling is, however, well below 
the national average and too many recycling bins are diverted to general waste 
due to contamination
• Collection infrastructure is being improved so that people are encouraged  
to recycle more with domestic food waste collections to start in 2021
• Reading has reduced the proportion of domestic waste which is sent to landfill  
to 17% (April-Sept 2020 figures) and a large proportion of domestic general 
waste is incinerated with energy captured to generate electricity
• Refill Reading was launched by Transition Town Reading in 2016 to help 
independent shops overcome the costs of a reusable cup scheme and has since 
been expanded to promote other opportunities to Refill
• In 2019 Caversham became the first community in Reading to start working 
towards Surfers Against Sewage Plastic Free Community accreditation
• In 2019 Reading Borough Council passed a motion committing the Council 
to eliminate wherever possible single use plastic from Council premises and 
commissioned services17.
Priorities on the pathway to net zero 
The top priorities for the resources theme over the coming five years are: 
• To reduce the amount we throw away, including by encouraging more initiatives 
that offer people the option to rent, share and reuse as alternatives to single-use 
and disposability
• To recycle more of what we discard, using the infrastructure that already exists and 
making targeted interventions to reduce contamination and address gaps in provision
• To strategically identify products and systems that can be redesigned to make it 
easier to keep materials circulating at their highest value – developing Reading’s 
‘circular economy’ 
The long-term goal is for Reading to become a ‘zero waste’, circular economy.  
To achieve near ‘zero waste’ to landfill or incineration, it is necessary to establish 
markets based on the value of materials that would otherwise be considered as waste. 
If we cannot reduce or reuse materials before they become waste, the first step is to 
get better at separating what can be recycled. As well as a continued focus on moving 
towards zero waste in the household collection waste stream, attention also needs to 
be given to commercial waste, including construction and other industrial processes. 
Even after reducing waste and getting better at reusing and recycling what is left, 
there will still be some residual waste. The challenge then becomes to redesign the systems of production and use to avoid these materials reaching the waste stream. For 
all materials, the aim has to be to keep them circulating for as long as possible at the 
highest possible quality and value. Applying this principle opens up innovations like 
peer-to-peer lending and sharing, as well as repair and reuse. 
The action plan includes three strands that focus on experimenting at a system level, 
with actions designed to support behaviour change. These are chosen as iconic, high 
profile initiatives that have the potential to inspire and galvanise wider engagement.
• Plastic Free Reading: with the support of the Council and businesses there is 
an opportunity to encourage others to follow Caversham’s lead in working 
towards plastic-free community status, possibly leading to Plastic Free Reading 
accreditation for the town as a whole
• Climate friendly food: food is estimated to account for around 20% of UK 
emissions. Food waste needs to be minimised and food waste residues returned 
to the soil locally where possible. Eating local, seasonal produce will reduce 
emissions from production and transport. And there is growing recognition 
that moving to a more plant-based diet can both reduce emissions and improve 
health. While it is beyond the remit of this action plan to dictate what people eat, 
we can support and enable people to make informed choices about diet
• Zero Waste Festivals: a growing number of festivals have made sustainability a 
central principle. Fields of abandoned tents stick in the public memory but there 
is much good practice within Reading’s wide range of festivals. We plan to work 
with local festival organisers to explore opportunities to reduce waste. Reading 
Festival has already set itself the target of ending the sale of single-use plastic 
at its festival by 2021. But we are inviting them to go further and set a goal to 
become zero waste within five years. The aspiration of this theme is for Reading 
to become known as a town that champions zero waste at festivals
Underpinning this theme is the need for effective engagement and communication. 
The action plan therefore includes a number of initiatives that focus on the provision 
of information, education and skills to support people to make informed and 
responsible purchasing and consumption choices. 
Key adaptation issues for production, consumption and waste
Historic carbon emissions are already having an effect on our climate. For Reading 
this means adapting to the possibility of disruption to global supply chains, with 
the manufacture and supply of food, clothes and electronic equipment particularly 
exposed. The best way to increase our resilience to these impacts is to move away 
from the ‘take-make-waste’ approach to production and towards a more circular 
one, where resources are valued and circulated for as long as possible. There are 
also opportunities for innovation and business growth, with recognised growth in an 
“adaptation economy” in the UK and worldwide, as new products and services come 
to market in response to adaptation-related opportunities.
17 http://news.reading.gov.uk/reading-council-to-go-plastic-free/ 35
Resources Theme Action Plan: our aim for 2025 is that Reading is on track to become a zero waste town by 2030, is actively innovating to find new ways of using resources 
more efficiently and thereby minimising our contribution to climate change. To facilitate this transition, by 2025 it is easy for everybody to access information and services to help 
them find ways to reduce waste and repurpose things they no longer need. 
NB: Some of the actions included in the action plans below, and the scale and pace at which they can be progressed, will be subject to the prevailing national policy context and/or 
the provision of additional powers and resources by central government, as made clear in Reading’s climate emergency declaration (see section 3.2 above).
Sub category: Reduce – questioning our need to generate waste in the first place
Action name Description Targets and measure/milestone Target  
completion dateDelivery partners
R1  
Food:  Reducing 
domestic food waste »Establish baseline and set meaningful targets for reducing domestic 
food waste
 »Adopt the Love Food, Hate Waste toolkit from WRAP and drive 
behaviour change through communications
Links: BusinessBaseline research completed by March 2021 Q1 2021 Reading Borough Council 
(lead)
University of Reading 
(research)Communications programme in place, targets set 
and tracked annually from July 2021Q3 2021 onwards
R2  
Food:  Reducing 
commercial food waste »Establish baseline and set meaningful targets for reducing  
commercial food waste
 »Create a programme combining reduction measures, well-managed 
charity donations and best outcome waste processing
 »Collaborative programme by and for business
Links: Community, Business, EducationBaseline research completed by September 2021 Q3 2021 RCAN (lead)
Reading UK CIC
University of Reading 
(research)
Connect Reading
Waste/recycling 
contractors
Reading Borough Council
Commercial partiesCommunications programme in place, targets set 
and tracked annually from January 2022Q1 2022
Commercial food waste collection from  TBC TBC
R3  
Food:  Reducing food 
waste in schools »Establish baseline and set meaningful targets for reducing  
food waste in schools
 »Create a programme combining reduction measures, well-managed 
charity donations and best outcome waste processing
 »Commercial food waste collection to be introduced  
by Reading BC for schools
Links: Community, Business, EducationBaseline research completed by September 2021 Q3 2021 RCAN (lead)
University of Reading 
(research)
Reading Borough Council
Commercial waste 
partnersCommunications programme in place, targets set 
and tracked annually from January 2022Q1 2022
Commercial food waste collection from  TBC TBC
 36
Action name Description Targets and measure/milestone Target  
completion dateDelivery partners
R4  
Other: Clothing »Establish baseline and set meaningful targets for reducing the amount 
of clothing wasted
 »Introduce programmes to divert unwanted clothing from general waste 
through various means including donation, swapping, sharing, leasing/
rental, etc.
 »Investigate the potential for emulating the WearNext project pioneered 
in New York
Links: Business, CommunityEstablish baseline and identify areas for 
improvementQ1 2021 Reading Circular 
Economy Club (lead)
Reading UK CIC
Connect Reading
Re3 (baseline data)Publish programme of targeted interventions Q4 2021
R5  
Other: Resource 
efficiency »Publish easy to access and understand best practice guidance covering 
all common household purchases (in and out of home)
 »Focus on extended life, zero waste, energy efficiency
 »Signpost established labels and standards, advisory bodies, etc.
 »Establish communications programme to reinforce behaviour change
Links: Communications and EngagementGuidance published and communications 
programme launchedQ2 2021 ReadingCAN (lead)
Re3
Reading UK CIC
Sub category: Reuse – keeping products in use for longer; delaying the point at which they need to be recycled 
Action name Description Targets and measure/milestone Target  
completion dateDelivery partners
R6  
Reuse and repair:  
Establish a definitive 
information source on 
reuse and repair »Compile and maintain a comprehensive directory of reuse and repair 
resources in Reading, and encourage new ones, especially through 
social enterprise
 »Include information resources like ifixit and services like Reading 
Repair Café and Reading Bicycle Kitchen
 »Establish communications programme to reinforce behaviour change
Links: CommunityDirectory published, update process and 
communications programme in place by April 2021Q2 2021 ReadingCAN (lead)
Organisations offering  
reuse and repair services
Reading UK CIC
Transition Towns
Re3
R7  
Sharing, renting and 
swapping »Compile and maintain a comprehensive directory of sharing, renting 
and swapping resources, and encourage new ones
 »Include peer to peer systems like Freegle, rental and “as a service” 
systems, charity outlets and platform services like Too Good to Go
Links: CommunityDirectory published, update process and 
communications programme in placeQ2 2021 ReadingCAN (lead)
Organisations offering 
sharing, rental and 
swapping services
Transition Towns
 37
Sub category: Recycle – seeing what we end up throwing away as still having value, and doing our best to retain and recover that value at its highest level
Action name Description Targets and measure/milestone Target  
completion dateDelivery partners
R8  
Food: Kerbside food 
waste recycling »Maximise take-up of kerbside food waste recycling when introduced
 »Appropriate annual targets to be set in conjunction with Reading BC/
Re3
 »Communications programme required to drive behaviour change
Links: Community, EducationIncrease Reading’s recycling rate by 7% through 
food waste collectionQ4 2021 Reading Borough Council
Re3
R9  
Other: Glass »Establish a baseline and set meaningful targets for increasing  
glass collection
 »Improve access to glass recycling facilities for residents
 »Focus on areas with high density housing/low car ownership
 »Work with hospitality industry to introduce colour segregated  
glass collection
Links: Community, BusinessEstablish baseline and identify areas for 
improvementQ1 2021 Reading Borough Council  
(Domestic lead)
Reading UK CIC 
(Business lead)
UoR (research)
Waste/recycling 
contractorsPublish plan to introduce improved provision for 
residents and businesses, including targets for 
collection2023
R10  
Other:  
Kerbside recycling »Maximise kerbside collection and minimise contamination
 »Increase awareness of what can go in kerbside recycling
 »Implement communications programme to encourage and improve 
confidence in recycling
 »Set annual targets to improve collection/contamination rates
Links: CommunityIncrease in Reading’s overall recycling rate by 4% 
by October 2021 arising from efforts to reduce 
contaminationQ4 2021 Reading Borough Council
Re3
Sub category: Rethink and redesign – Looking for opportunities to redesign products and systems to avoid waste, making Reading circular
Action name Description Targets and measure/milestone Target  
completion dateDelivery partners
R11  
Plastics:  
Plastic-Free Reading »Continued implementation of single-use plastic-free pledge by RBC 
and sharing the learning
 »Encouraging adoption of the Surfers Against Sewage Plastic-Free 
Community methodology and tools by communities, businesses  
and schools
 »Replicate Plastic Free Caversham concept to achieve the critical mass 
of groups, schools and businesses required to secure Plastic Free 
accreditation for Reading
Links: Business, Community, EducationReading BC to share own lessons in becoming 
plastic freeQ3 2021 Reading Borough Council  
(Council and schools lead)
Reading UK CIC 
(business lead)
Reading Business CANCaversham to secure accreditation as a Plastic 
Free Community, with first schools and businesses 
accredited Q3 2021
Plastic-Free Community accreditation gained by at 
least one other Reading community Q4 2021
Set annual targets for the number/percentage of 
schools and businesses to be Plastic-FreeQ3 2022
 38
Action name Description Targets and measure/milestone Target  
completion dateDelivery partners
R12  
Food:  
Climate-friendly diet »Publish reliable and authoritative information on how  
to eat more sustainably
 »Focus on dietary choices, sustainable sourcing, child nutrition
 »Guidance for caterers as well as individuals
Links: Community, Business, Health, Nature, EducationBest practice identified and guidance prepared Q1 2021 University of Reading
Subject-matter specialists 
(e.g. breastfeeding, food 
growing networks)Communications programme developed and 
campaign launched  Q3 2021
R13  
Plastics: Zero waste 
and circular festivals »Work with Reading’s festival organisers to develop resource-
stewardship systems to reduce waste at festival venues (and 
campsites, where appropriate)
 »Explore different approaches to engage and encourage organisers, 
vendors and festival goers in addressing waste
 »Establish baseline and set meaningful targets for reducing waste and 
maximising recovery of resources
 »Engage with Reading Festival to understand the challenge of campsite 
waste and explore opportunities to reduce unrecyclable tent waste
 »Connect with and draw on the experiences of Green Deal Circular 
Festivals and other sustainable events bodies (A Greener Festival, 
Julie’s Bicycle, Vision 2025)
Links: BusinessWork with ReadingUK CIC local festival organisers 
group to understand the challenges and share best 
practiceQ3 2020 Reading Circular 
Economy Club (lead)
Reading UK CIC
University of Reading 
(research)
Waste/recycling 
contractors
Festival organisersCollect baseline data Q1 2021
Co-produce programme of knowledge sharing and 
local collaborationQ2 2021
All of Reading’s festivals to have a statement or 
page describing their approach to sustainability on 
their websiteQ3 2021
Zero tents to be left behind on site at Reading 
FestivalQ3 2025   
R14  
Circular economy: 
Establish Reading 
Circular Economy Club 
to grow the Circular 
Economy in Reading »Establish Reading Circular Economy Club – part of international 
network of Circular Economy Clubs
 »Peer to peer information exchange and networking for businesses/
organisations
 »Develop resource exchange to create closed resource loops, reducing 
use of virgin resources and finding new uses for waste products
Links: BusinessReading Circular Economy Club set up Complete Reading Circular 
Economy Club (lead)
Reading CAN/Reading 
Business CAN
Re3Regular scheduled meetings and events established 
and publicised Q4 2020
Resources exchange set up and operational Q2 2021
 39
READING CLIMATE EMERGENCY STRATEGY:
W ATER THEME ACTION PLAN
Climate change and the water environment
Our changing climate is expected to lead to more extreme weather events for Reading. 
These will include more intense rainfall and floods, heat-waves and droughts. The 
impacts are predicted to increase over time, with winters getting warmer and wetter, 
while summers become hotter and drier. 
Reading is located in one of the most water stressed parts of the country, with 
a similar water availability per head to some communities in the Middle East. 
Approximately 80% of Reading’s water is abstracted from the River Kennet, at the 
Fobney Water Treatment works. The chalk aquifer under the Berkshire Downs is the 
source of most of the water in the Kennet. Fortunately this gives Reading a good level 
of resilience for its water supply. However, we are vulnerable: with the potential for 
more intense future droughts – coupled with the expected growth of the town – we 
need to make sure we manage our use of water carefully.
As with other sectors, COVID-19 has had a huge impact on the water sector. We have 
seen a big increase in peak water usage, and a dramatic shift in the balance between 
domestic and commercial water consumption. Some of these changes, including more 
working from home, are likely to be permanent. Hence it will be a priority for us to 
understand how much more vulnerable Reading’s water supply is, and it will make 
delivery of our actions even more important so we can prepare for the added impacts 
of the changing climate.
The risk of flooding will increase for Reading, particularly from the River Thames and 
from surface water, as a result of more intense storms. We have a large area of land 
at risk of flooding which is predicted to get worse due to climate change: increasing 
the frequency, duration and depth of floods; and increasing the area of land at risk. 
This needs to be taken into account when considering new development, including 
buildings. A Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA) has already been undertaken 
which describes and analyses how Reading is affected by flood risk and the nature 
of that risk. The flood plain plays an important role in protecting the built-up area 
of Reading and the surrounding area as it accommodates floodwater. This has been 
recognised in Reading’s adopted Local Plan and reflected within in its policies to 
ensure that: the capacity of the floodplain is not reduced; flood flow paths are not 
obstructed; and that inappropriate development in the flood-plain is avoided.
 40Progress to date
We have a strong community of water industry experts in Reading, who will help 
guide us towards our vision and targets. These include:
• Thames Water (who have their head office in Reading) supply all of our water, 
and most of our drainage, and have a lot of information and expertise to share
• The Environment Agency regulate our water environment and will help us to 
understand what the environmental limits are, as climate change increases our 
drought and flood risk
There are also a number of policies in the Reading Local Plan, adopted in November 
2019, which are designed to encourage more efficient use of water and prepare for 
the impacts described above.
Priorities on the pathway to net zero for emissions related to water use
A big focus for the water theme will be on learning over the next 5 years, as we 
help everyone to become more ‘water aware’. The need to save water is primarily 
an adaptation issue. However, approximately 1% of the UK’s total greenhouse gas 
emissions are associated with pumping and treating water, so being more water 
efficient will make a notable difference. Of greater significance is the energy involved 
in heating water in our homes. This can be a very large part of the carbon footprint 
of a house. Measures to tackle this are picked up in the Energy and Low Carbon 
Development theme. 
Key adaptation issues for the water environment
Reducing our water consumption is a vital response to the increasing risk from 
drought with the changing climate. Ambitious national targets on water efficiency are 
anticipated within the next year. Rather than set additional targets on water we intend 
to develop these, during the life of this strategy, into robust 2050 targets for Reading. 
These will aim to make us the most water efficient town in the country. Following on 
from this, we intend to:
• Contact Defra and volunteer Reading as a case study town to benchmark this 
new 2050 target
• Work with council planners and Thames Water to develop our already good Local 
Plan policies to explore the concept of ‘Water Neutrality’ in new development
• Research into water reuse, and help us understand our potential to help reduce 
future water demand
• Support Thames Water’s future rollout of smart water meters on household and 
commercial propertiesOur other key priority for Reading is to improve flood resilience:
• Through education we will help people and businesses prepare. By 2025 we 
want everyone at risk of flooding in Reading to be signed-up to the EA Flood 
Warning service
• We will advise on and encourage the reshaping of the town: breaking-up hard 
surfaces and encouraging green roofs, natural flood management measures and 
sustainable drainage systems to slow the flow of storm water. This will give it a 
chance to irrigate rather than flood the town
We also want to improve understanding about where our water goes so that we can 
minimise the impacts of waste water on the environment. 
 41
Water Theme Action Plan: Reading will aim to become the most water aware and water efficient town in the UK, going beyond national targets. We will achieve this by 
developing and implementing a dedicated communications and education strategy and delivering a range of water saving improvements in Reading’s homes and businesses. 
Climate change will also increase the risk of flooding: significantly from the River Thames and from urban storm water. We will help residents and businesses understand these risks 
and to get ready for them. 
NB: Some of the actions included in the action plans below, and the scale and pace at which they can be progressed, will be subject to the prevailing national policy context and/or 
the provision of additional powers and resources by central government, as made clear in Reading’s climate emergency declaration (see section 3.2 above).
Sub category: Water supply and water conservation 
Action name Description Targets and measure/milestone Target  
completion dateDelivery partners
W1  
Educate the public 
about Reading’s water 
situation  »Share and explain our 2050 target and how this compares to current 
consumption, e.g.: 
- Domestic water consumption by activity
- Info on non-domestic water consumption
- Where our water comes from
 »Develop Comms Strategy for engaging public, including schools
Links: Education, Community, Business, Communication and EngagementAvailable material published on RCAN website 2020 Thames Water
New material prepared and published 2021
W2  
Educate households 
about their water 
consumption and the 
need to save water »Share information on the risks of drought and importance  
of water conservation
 »Provide tips and information on how to save water  
in the home and garden
 »Develop and implement Comms Strategy for engaging households
Links: Energy & LCD, Nature, Communication and EngagementInformation resource compiled and published 2021 Thames Water
Comms programme underway 2025
W3  
Educate businesses 
about water use, 
efficiency benefits, 
and dry weather 
preparedness/response »Share the Thames Water Drought Plan
 »Signpost relevant information and case studies from reputable sources 
 »Create industry-specific advice and case studies 
 »Run a drought exercise with Local Resilience Forum (LRF), partners and 
businesses
 »Communicate the Environment Agency ‘incident management’ 
approach to drought 
Links: Business, Energy and LCD, Communication and EngagementInformation resource compiled and published 2020 Thames Water (lead)
Environment Agency
RCAN
Reading Business  
Climate Action NetworkIndustry-specific guidance available 2021
Drought exercise and incident management 
response 2022
W4  
Educate the public 
about water quality and 
sewer abuse »Publish sewer abuse and water quality stats, messages and content to 
RCAN website
Links: Business, Community, Communication and EngagementContent published 2021 Thames Water
 42
Action name Description Targets and measure/milestone Target  
completion dateDelivery partners
W5  
Water efficiency 
measures »Promote installation of water saving and efficiency devices  
during refurbishment 
 »Promote Thames Water’s ‘Smarter Business Visit’ scheme  
to all schools in Reading
 »Increase awareness of leaky-loos and benefits  
of fixing plumbing losses
 »Engage with building management companies  
to promote retrofitting/leak fix
 »Expand the provision of water info packs from new homes  
to all households
 »Promote Thames Water’s ‘Smarter Home’ visit scheme  
to homes with smart meters
 »Support the roll-out of smart meters
 »Conduct periodic research on understanding and engagement  
with water saving
Links: Community, Business, Communication and EngagementRefurbishment programme 2020 RCAN 
Reading Borough Council
Thames Water
University of Reading 
(research)Schools visits, building management company 
engagement and leaky loos programme2021
Water info packs, smart meters and  
research project2025
W6  
‘Water Neutrality’ as a 
planning requirement »Investigate whether the RBC Sustainable Planning Document can be 
modified to include:
- the requirement for all new major developments to contribute to 
funding water saving measures equivalent to the development’s water 
consumption
- adopting the ‘fittings approach’ within Building Regulations rather 
than a pcc calculation approach
Links: Energy and LCDShare the contents of the Sustainable Planning 
Document on RCAN website2020 Reading Borough Council
Thames Water
Feedback on required amendments 2022
Amendments implemented 2025
W7  
Leadership and 
Influence »Lobby MPs and Defra to introduce a mandatory water label to help 
consumers make water-efficient choices
 »Lobby MPs and Defra to strengthen building regulations and planning 
process, to drive water efficiency within all new developments and 
procurement schemesWater labelling 2021 RCAN
Building regs and planning 2025
 43
Action name Description Targets and measure/milestone Target  
completion dateDelivery partners
W8  
Research to drive future 
improvements »Research the costs, benefits and suitability, of rainfall harvesting and 
grey water recycling schemes.
 »Use UKCP18 climate modelling and local river flow models, to develop 
projections for future drought / water resource availability.
 »With RBC and LEP update our estimates of Reading population growth 
to 2050 
 »Develop a new evidence-based 2050 water target 
 »Review the first Adaptation Plan and identify and deliver initial win-
win opportunities
 »Identify thresholds, risks, solutions and case studies for the second 
Adaptation Plan
 »Work with Thames Water to understand the changes to household and 
business water use due to COVID-19 impacts
Links: AdaptationDevelop research proposals 2020-25 RCAN
University of Reading 
(research)
Sub category: Flooding Resilience
Action name Description Targets and measure/milestone Target  
completion dateDelivery partners
W9  
Raise awareness of 
fluvial (river) flood risk »Raise awareness of flood risk from the River Thames and the proposed 
Reading and Caversham Scheme by carrying out various engagement 
activities
 »Update the flood maps on the Gov.UK website to show the areas at 
risk of flooding based on the latest flood modelling 
Links: Education, Business, Transport, Community, AdaptationEngagement activities Q2-3 2020 Environment Agency
Reading Borough Council
Local councillors
Local businesses and 
community groupsFlood maps updated 2022
W10  
Raise awareness of 
the Flood Warning and 
flood alert service »Increase the number of at-risk homes and businesses signed-up to 
receive Flood Alerts
 »Signpost advice on the Flood Warning Service and what to do before, 
during and after a flood
 »Develop “what if” scenarios to help people and businesses understand 
the importance of self-preparation, and education about flood risk
Links: Education, Business, Community, Adaptation90% sign-up to FW service Q4 2021 Environment Agency
Reading Borough Council
Community groups100% sign-up to FW service Q4 2025
‘What if’ scenarios developed and posted on 
ReadingCANQ4 2025
 44
Action name Description Targets and measure/milestone Target  
completion dateDelivery partners
W11  
Reducing fluvial flood 
risk from River Thames »Work in partnership with Risk Management Authorities and local 
stakeholders to identify ways to reduce fluvial flood risk
 »Gain support from all Reading communities on action to reduce flood 
risk from the River Thames
 »Seek funding through partnership funding and local grants.
Links: Education, Business, Community, AdaptationReading community makes decision about favoured 
River Thames flood reduction optionQ2-3 2021 Environment Agency
Reading Borough Council
Local councillors
Thames Water
Local Resilience Forum
Community groups and 
local businessesFunds raised to deliver favoured option 2025
W12  
Implement sustainable 
urban drainage systems 
(SuDS) »Explain the importance of SuDS and their practical application
 »Find out what post scheme monitoring is happening and recommend 
how this can be improved
Links: Nature, Adaptation, TransportShare planning information 2020 Reading Borough Council
Monitoring, reporting and research 2025
W13  
Investigate the use of 
green infrastructure to 
reduce and slow down 
storm water »Investigate measures to slow the flow of storm water, eg by planting 
and creating scrapes and swales
 »Follow up on research by Reading University and the Landwise project
 »Transfer learning to RBC Sustainable Design and Construction 
(supplementary planning document)
Links: Nature, Transport, Adaptation, BusinessScope project brief and costs 2020 Water theme group
Environment Agency
University of ReadingDeliver results 2023
W14  
Improve the resilience 
of the Kennet Meadows »Develop a plan for the Kennet Meadows to make it a resilient wetland
 »Make sure the plans preserve the need for the meadows to act as 
flood plain
 »Consider the drought risk and make sure the needs of the meadows 
are considered in EA / TW drought plans. There will be a limit to their 
protection… is it possible to develop a recovery plan early to try and 
mitigate?
Links:  Nature, Adaptation, EnergyWorkshop to bring partners together and agree 
scope2021 Environment Agency
CEH (Wallingford)
University of Reading
Water theme group 
memberDevelop and share plan 2023
W15  
Improve our flood risk 
adaptation plans »Improve our understanding of climate change adaptation thresholds 
 »Investigate the latest UK climate projections to find out what extreme 
rainfall events we need to prepare for
 »Check the developing EA guidance for fluvial flooding and develop our 
own understanding of the changing flood risk for the River Thames 
and River Kennet
 »Develop our flood adaptation plans through to 2050 and beyond
Links: Education, AdaptationPost information on revised future flood modelling, 
as it is released Ongoing Environment Agency
Reading Borough Council
Local interest groups Deliver report on change in storm rainfall, and 
Thames and Kennet flood peaks Q4 2024
 45
Action name Description Targets and measure/milestone Target  
completion dateDelivery partners
W16  
Investigate 
opportunities for Green 
roofs »Develop recommendations for green roofs, green walls and 
landscaping for new build
 »Explore opportunities for retrofitting homes and offices
 »Develop advice for home owners on the benefits of breaking up hard 
surfaces in driveways and gardens
Links: Transport, Nature, Community, BusinessCreate research proposals 2021 University of Reading
Reading Borough Council
Environment AgencyDeliver results 2025
W17  
Develop links to the 
Thames Valley Local 
Resilience Forum »Investigate the limits of our emergency plans and explore what the 
community of Reading can do to become more resilient
 »Share the developing adaptation planning and vision for Reading with 
the LRF to inform long term strategic decisions
 »Share advice on being prepared for an incident including  
“Thames Valley: Are you ready?” booklet and advice from the 
Environment Agency
 »Use resources from Business in the Community Business Resilience 
Group to help businesses improve resilience
Links: Community, Business, AdaptationOrganise meeting with LRF 2021 Environment Agency
Reading Borough Council
Thames Water
University of Reading
Local Resilience ForumPublic workshop/ event on resilience and 
adaptation 2022
 46
READING CLIMATE EMERGENCY STRATEGY:
NATURE THEME ACTION PLAN
Nature and climate change
The natural environment is generally considered an ally in the battle against climate 
change as woodland, grassland, wetland and soils can all lock up carbon if managed 
correctly. But the natural environment is also threatened by the impacts of climate 
change. Rising temperatures will be higher in the town than that in the surrounding 
countryside due to the ‘urban heat island’ effect. More intense periods of rain and 
drought are expected, with impacts on natural habitats and increased competition for 
water resources to meet the needs of people, business and the environment. 
Changes to vegetation and soil will affect many species and in ways that we have not 
seen before. More research is needed to gauge the way different species are affected, 
but we can expect more intense competition for food in times of drought and flood 
and impacts on the life cycle of certain species if they, or their prey, are dependent 
on particular plants at specific times. Whether climate change could lead to local or 
regional extinction is yet to be determined, but we know that certain species have not 
yet recovered from population crashes in the 1970s. Climate change also means that 
new, non-native and invasive species could colonise the area.
The COVID-19 lockdown highlighted the importance of people having access to 
greenspace where they live as it became even more vital for the health and wellbeing 
of people and communities as other activities were subject to restrictions. This 
underlines the importance of managing greenspace in a way which helps addresses 
climate challenges whilst improving access for people.
Progress to date
While Reading is predominantly an urban borough, the importance of its green areas 
and open spaces is increasingly recognised – not just for their own sake, but for the 
benefits they offer to our health and wellbeing. Examples of this include:
• The adoption of policies in the Local Plan to ensure that green spaces are joined 
up and that new development delivers a ‘net gain’ for biodiversity
• The launch of the ‘Trees for Reading’ initiative which seeks to increase tree cover 
in the town
• ‘Rewilding’ trials have been initiated by Reading Borough Council, reducing the 
frequency of mowing on selected highway verges to benefit wildflowers and 
wildlife, with initial feedback from the public proving very positive  
Priorities on the pathway to net zero for nature and key adaptation issues
There is growing recognition of the role which ‘nature-based solutions’ can play 
in delivering climate change mitigation, and more information on this can be 
downloaded from the ReadingCAN website. Key priorities in this respect are: 
• Managing existing natural habitats to sequester and store more carbon:  
by increasing the amount of permanent cover (including but not restricted  
to tree cover) and managing greenspace differently in the town and, perhaps 
even more important, increasing the storage of carbon within the soil, the 
natural environment can make a significant contribution to reducing Reading’s 
carbon footprint
• Managing dead and dying plant material to leave in situ wherever possible  
or managed to return carbon and minerals to the soil
• Ensuring that new development delivers a ‘net gain’ for the environment: as Reading 
grows we need to ensure that national and local planning policies requiring a ‘net 
gain’ for biodiversity are observed, so that new and restored habitats can help us 
mitigate the causes and adapt to the impacts of climate change
• Creating and enhancing wildlife corridors through Reading: by joining up natural 
and semi-natural habitats we can increase the value of Reading’s greenspaces as 
carbon stores and sinks, as well as making it easier for people and wildlife to adapt 
to climate impacts
Increasing vegetation cover will reduce the urban heat island effect and improve 
air quality.  Street trees will provide shade in the town and encourage cycling and 
walking, while hedgerows will offer shade and some protection from wind.
By increasing permeable surfaces in the town, we can allow water to infiltrate the soils 
rather than run-off to increase flood risk. Some green spaces may also be able to store 
water for lengthy periods to mitigate flood risk in the town. The type of planting, 
the management of top growth and soils, and the management of water all need to 
change across the town; not just in gardens and green spaces, but also in car parks, 
road verges and vertical spaces.
Green corridors – along transport routes, waterways as well as in parks and open 
spaces – provide a route for wildlife to move through the town and colonise different 
spaces which will improve their resilience as local conditions change. Since we expect 
higher temperatures and risk of drought, as well as more intense periods of rain, these 
corridors need to contain areas that are big enough to provide shade and shelter as 
well as areas of higher ground. 
 47
Creating and improving these wildlife corridors will be beneficial to people as well. They 
will provide shade for people as they move through the town and additional greenery 
to reduce the urban heat island effect, improve air quality and enhance the townscape.
Gardens are an important resource for nature and higher temperatures, more intense 
rainfall and periods of drought in the future means that changes are needed in the 
way we manage our gardens to mitigate the impact of climate change and continue 
to provide a useful habitat for a range of species.
The green corridors and gardens referred to above are very important for wildlife, 
but the town needs a coherent approach as well to mitigate the direct impact of 
high temperatures on human health as well as on biodiversity. Emergency cool areas 
may be created in hospitals and public buildings, but most buildings could benefit 
from tree planting to provide shade, and perhaps green walls and roofs reducing 
internal temperature gains (as well as warming in winter). The nature theme action 
plan therefore looks at ways to modify the built environment to mitigate the climate 
change impacts, complementing actions in the water, health and low carbon 
development themes.
Photo: Scott Webb
  48Nature Theme Action Plan:  By 2025 the people of Reading will live in a greener town with changes to the management of open spaces and the green links between them 
that store more carbon as well as giving shade for hot summers, corridors for wildlife and some flood control. New developments will include biodiversity net gain and water 
management, and there will be exemplar sites showing how to change planting and soil management around buildings to mitigate the impacts of climate change.
NB: Some of the actions included in the action plans below, and the scale and pace at which they can be progressed, will be subject to the prevailing national policy context and/or 
the provision of additional powers and resources by central government, as made clear in Reading’s climate emergency declaration (see section 3.2 above).They are also dependent 
upon recruiting enough volunteers to the Nature Task Force to supplement the existing nature theme group.
Sub Category:  Carbon Sequestration
Action name Description Targets and measure/milestone Target  
completion dateDelivery partners
N1  
Increasing tree cover 
across the town   »Plant more street trees  
 »Test new planting options in town centre and on the road network 
 »Promote trees in private gardens/ business/ schools 
 »Encourage tree and hedge planting in air pollution  
hotspots esp. schools
 »Enable more street tree planters 
 »Promote use of degradable tree planting maps and tubes
Link: Education, TransportTargets per updated Biodiversity Action Plan & 
RBC Tree Strategy (NB resources for and timing of 
implementation may be influenced by England Tree 
Strategy, publication of which is awaited)RBC to adopt Tree 
Strategy 2020
Planting programme  
to 2025Reading Borough Council
Ethical Reading
Tree Wardens (RTWN)
Nature Task Force
Econet
Food4Families
Thames WaterPublish guidance on RCAN website 2020
2 school hedges/year 2021
Review policies for traffic restrictions 2021
Policy for council planting; publish guidance  
for householders2021
N2  
Managing land to 
store more carbon and 
increase biodiversity »Review methods to protect existing stored carbon and relative  
benefits of different land uses 
 »Identify optimum practical and effective management systems  
for retaining carbon in Reading
 »Feedback into review of management of Council land Conduct literature review 2021 Reading Borough Council
University of Reading
Nature Task Force
Berks, Bucks & Oxon 
Wildlife TrustFeedback into review of Council land management 
and planting programme2021
N3  
Explore use of biochar 
and charcoal »Research on cost benefit of charcoal and biochar
 »Expect results to show that expensive to purchase but beneficial for tree 
growth and resilience to climate change and should be part of planting 
plans
 »Seek opportunities to make charcoal from local forestry waste  
to sell locally and reduce imports and to dig into the soils  
to sequester carbonResearch undertaken 
RBC ground maintenance policies and planting 
policies revised accordingly
Advice leaflets for householders on RCAN website2023 University of Reading
Reading Borough Council
Local charcoal makers
BBOWT
Coppice Federation
 49
Action name Description Targets and measure/milestone Target  
completion dateDelivery partners
N4  
Review Council parks 
and woodlands »Survey land, including allotments, and make recommendations that 
increase carbon storage, flood control, and Biodiversity Action Plan 
delivery, compatible with increased public use for health 
Link: Water, HealthSurvey minimum four sites per year
Recommend management changesFrom 2020 Reading BC 
Nature Task Force
Econet
RDNHS
Reading Tree  
Wardens Network 
N5  
Test different 
management of parks, 
verges and roundabouts »Review mowing regimes in parks 
 »Consider measures like extending tree cover, scrub regeneration and 
conservation grassland
 »Consider options for managing roadside verges/roundabouts
 »Test, review and implement preferred options
 »Accompany changes with public education campaign Annual meeting to review options for evidence-
based changes From 2021 Reading Borough Council
Nature Task Force
Community groups Consider options for changing mowing/planting 
on 6 area/yr of verge/roundabouts and 2 areas in 
parksFrom 2021
Review impact and extend across town From 2020
N6  
Planning for 
replacement for ash 
dieback »Decide which areas to be left for regeneration with resistant ash
 »Decide on replacement species on Council land where necessary 
 »Grow on local material to plant out (potential schools project)  
Link: EducationReview Council woodlands and revise management 
plans 2022 RBC Parks
‘Friends of’ groups
Nature Task Force
Community groups 2 year collection of seeds with schools 2 per year
N7 
Kennet MeadowsReview options to increase carbon storage and biodiversity through:
 »Maintaining water levels through the year
 »increasing granularity of livestock management to form a mosaic of swards
 »Before and after surveys required for carbon capture and biodiversity
Links: Water Discussions underway.
Completion targets and dates to be agreed TBA Land Owners
Environement Agency
Reading Borough Council
Nature Task Force
Thames Water
N8  
Increase hedgerows »Survey existing hedgerows and suggest new hedgelines/infill
 »Schools encouraged to have hedge boundaries to mitigate air pollution      
 »Hedgerows promoted along cycle routes/ walking routes for air pollution 
mitigation and shade
 »Links: HealthReview hedgerows as part of wildlife corridor 
survey at 10km/yearAnnual report Nature Task Force  
to survey
Landowners to plant  
and maintainTarget schools and park boundaries for priority 
planting2 per year from 2021
N9  
Food waste/green 
waste »Support no dig cultivation, home composting/ worm bins  
 »Disseminate information on food fermentation and support larger scale 
waste trials 
 »Seek University research to quantify effectsInformation on RCAN website and links to other 
sources2020 Nature Task Force
Food4Families
Community groups
University of Reading
Museum of English  
Rural LifeSupport 2 trials: data required before end of RE3 
contract2024
 50
Sub category: Supporting wildlife habitats and biodiversity 
Action name Description Targets and measure/milestone Target  
completion dateDelivery partners
N10  
Compensatory habitat 
restoration/offsets for 
urban development »Baseline review of the likely requirements for habitat compensation and 
biodiversity net gain due to development of sites in the Local Plan
 »Financial mechanism developedSystem to be set up 2020 RBC planning
Implementation Continuous
N11  
Identifying wildlife 
corridors »Working from the green links shown in the Local Plan, and revision  
of the Biodiversity Action Plan, identify primary and secondary routes
 »Agree any changes/additions changes with RBC planning department 
and CouncilIdentify routes and mark on plan for transfer to 
RBC Geographical Information System2020 RBC planning
BAP review/NTF
RBC Parks & Highways
N12  
Assessing the quality of 
wildlife corridors »Review existing data 
 »Walk through and rapid assessment of accessible land 
 »List priorities for enhancement on public land and community land 
Link: Community, HealthStart within year 1, 10km a year
reports on the corridor surveyAnnual from 2020-
2025Reading Borough Council
Nature Task Force
Community groups
Network Rail
BBOWT
N13  
Managing the impact of 
development areas on 
wildlife corridors »Ensure design and planting on development sites contributes to wildlife 
corridors 
 »Ensure connectivity through developments with appropriate 
supplemental planning guidance 
 »Align with objectives of revised Biodiversity Action Plan and/or green 
infrastructure strategy/planSupplementary Planning Document published 2021
Implementation 
ongoingReading Borough Council
Berkshire Local  
Nature Partnership
BBOWT
N14  
Species protection/ 
recovery »Biodiversity Action Plan develops objectives for increasing/recovery  
of identified key species 
 »Ensure these are fed into management methods and changes in wildlife 
corridorsDevelop land management objectives 2020 Reading Borough Council
Nature Task Force
University of ReadingImplement from: 2021
N15  
Biodiversity 
enhancement pilots »Meet/work with residents associations/ community groups
 »Offer regular workshops/newsletter input/other methods to support 
changes in these areas 
Link: CommunityIdentify 2 areas to participate including  
an area of deprivation2020 Nature Task Force
Adopt-a-street
Community groups Review impact relative to other areas 2023
N16  
Data recording/ 
monitoring »Request that all new data go onto TVERC, irecord or data systems that 
link with TVERC (Thames Valley Environmental Records Centre)
 »Recruit volunteers for recording 
 »Encourage householders to take part in garden surveys/ TV projects
Link: CommunityContact all local groups 2021 Nature Task Force
Community groups
University of ReadingRecruit volunteers 2020
Publicise surveys undertaken by others Each year
 51
Sub category: Planting for biodiversity and resilience 
Action name Description Targets and measure/milestone Target  
completion dateDelivery partners
N17  
Provide Information on 
adaptation  »Provide information on climate resilience and wildlife friendly gardening 
 »Improving soil structure and promote water reuse
 »Promote exemplar sites – eg council, church, school
Links: Water, Health, EducationInformation published on RCAN website Q4 2020 Nature Task Force
RISC
Community groups
Reading Borough Council2 exemplar projects by: 2025
N18  
Greening front 
gardens and reducing 
hardstanding »Provide information and links to potential designs for increasing green 
cover and reducing hardstanding
 »Hold seminar for developers
 »Seek TV support for project, eg Gardener’s World
Links: Water, Energy and LCDInformation by end 2021 2022 RCAN
Nature Task Force
RHSSeminar 2023
Contact TV options 2020
N19  
Interaction with garden 
centres »Encourage garden centres to introduce a wildlife friendly and climate 
change adaptation section
 »Peat-free labelling of composts
Link: BusinessProgramme introduced 2020 Nature Task Force
BBOWT
Sub category: Green Spaces for Cooling/well-being
Action name Description Targets and measure/milestone Target  
completion dateDelivery partners
N20 
Green InfrastructureUsing green infrastructure to reduce carbon emissions from buildings and 
promote urban cooling, e.g.:
 »Promote green walls and roofs on new build 
 »Promote green roofs on existing single storey structures
 »Plant for shading of cycle/pedestrian routes
 »Research on impacts of green infrastructure required
Links: Energy & LCD, Water, Transport, Health In local plan. May need supplementary planning 
documentSPD 2022 Reading Borough Council
Nature Task Force
University of Reading Advice published on RCAN website 2022
Research projects to evaluate effects 2021
N21  
Develop green space to 
enable increased health 
benefitsTree/hedge planting to provide shade, reduce particulate pollution and 
oxides of nitrogen
Links: HealthPart of reviews referred to in N4 above Ongoing from 2020 Landowners
 52
Sub category:  Communication and Engagement
Action name Description Targets and measure/milestone Target  
completion dateDelivery partners
N22  
Raising awareness in 
the community »Identify two areas in the town, including an area of deprivation, to 
concentrate existing resources to test ideas and communication methods 
for dissemination 
 »Extend proven ideas to other areas 
Links: All themes, Business, Community2 target areas identified and developed Identify test areas  
by 2021;
Extend to four areas 
by 2025Nature Task Force
N23  
Advice service for 
adaptation »Provide advice to schools/ community groups/for wildlife friendly 
gardening/ water efficient gardening/recycling in the garden 
Links: Water, Education, Community, AdaptationOffer half day advice service to up to 20 
organisations a year, plus online leafletsAdvice service from 
2021Nature Task Force 
BBOWT
N24 
Support schools in 
their climate change 
initiatives »Provide list of support actions available through ReadingCAN or external 
sources to enhance existing systems (e.g. ecoschools), and distribute 
Links: Education, Communication and EngagementCreate option list for schools 2020 RCAN
Nature Task ForceOffer 8 support activities a year From 2021
N25  
Supporting Businesses 
and NGOs in their 
climate change 
initiatives »Make opportunities for groups to do practical work via Team Challenge 
Link: Business, Communication and Engagement6 actions a year Set up 
by 2021 Reading Borough Council
Nature Task Force
Econet
The Conservation 
Volunteers
N26  
Identify opportunities 
for green prescribing »Produce a list of groups willing to provide options for social prescribing 
and make available to local GPs
Links: HealthList available to RBC Public Health 2021 Nature Task Force
 53
READING CLIMATE EMERGENCY STRATEGY:
HEALTH & WELLBEING  
THEME ACTION PLAN
Health is a ‘State of complete physical, mental, and social well-being, and not merely 
the absence of disease or infirmity’. The Health and wellbeing strand of the strategy 
takes account of the Social Determinants of Health (SDH) and enables us to make the 
link between health equity and climate change. SDH is a term to describe the social 
and environmental conditions in which people are born, grow, live, work, and age, 
which shape and drive health outcomes. 
This theme therefore considers the wellbeing of Reading’s people holistically, with the 
emphasis on living healthily in a changing climate and addressing health inequities by 
supporting the most vulnerable communities who are disproportionately exposed to 
climate impact including the elderly, homeless people, BAME communities and those 
living in our most deprived wards. It also recognises that the health impacts of climate 
change will be exacerbated by the additional risks associated with COVID-19.
The actions we need to take to reduce CO 2 and adapt to climate change also have the 
potential to improve our community’s health and wellbeing. Most of the themes of the 
Reading Climate Change Strategy contribute to the 2030 carbon zero target directly: 
they are primarily concerned with mitigation. The Health & Well-being Theme focuses 
on aligning health and climate goals as well as dealing with the consequences of 
climate change that are likely to negatively affect the health of people in Reading over 
the next 10 years, despite best efforts at mitigation. 
We have used the WHO analysis of the health impacts of climate change18 to define 
three categories of risk which are expected to significantly impact Reading – increased 
heat waves and related air quality issues, increased rainfall and associated flooding, 
and changing transmission patterns for infectious diseases. All of these can negatively 
affect the physical and mental health and wellbeing of Reading’s residents. Alongside 
these are the underlying issues of health issues associated with fuel poverty and the 
potential for mental health challenges associated with anxiety and stress caused by 
climate change. 
Many of the themes include outreach and education strategies; we propose that an 
integrated resource base and education programme be supported by appropriate 
partners. In order to monitor progress under many of the themes, monitoring of 
environmental characteristics will be needed. We propose that these be linked to 
monitoring of health data, potentially via a Lancet Countdown19 project. This could 
make environmental and health data visible to the public e.g. on public billboards  
or through apps. 
18 https://www.who.int/globalchange/181008_the_1_5_healthreport.pdf
19 https://www.lancetcountdown.org/
 54This is the first time that health has been included in Reading’s climate change strategy, therefore many of the actions are about linking with existing local and national frameworks 
and strategies, researching external sources, setting up resources, systems and processes for Reading and establishing networks to link health professionals to climate change 
planning. Outcome based targets could include falling levels of asthma, lower rate of heat-related fatalities and increase of journeys by zero carbon modes of walking and cycling. 
Health Theme Action Plan:  By 2025, people in Reading will be well informed about how to embed climate-friendly activities into their lives and self-manage the health impacts 
of climate change, benefiting from policies and programmes that enable them to thrive despite its effects. All climate change mitigation and adaptation strategies will consider the 
impact on health; with particular emphasis on heat-related health risks, air quality and mental wellbeing.
NB: Some of the actions included in the action plans below, and the scale and pace at which they can be progressed, will be subject to the prevailing national policy context and/or 
the provision of additional powers and resources by central government, as made clear in Reading’s climate emergency declaration (see section 3.2 above).
Sub category: Heat
Action name Description Targets and measure/milestone Target  
completion dateDelivery partners
H1  
Adaptation and 
anticipation in health 
facilitiesFacilities in hospitals and care homes adapted to extreme heat, e.g.
 »Provision of cool space for residents
 »Storage for medicines requiring cool temperatures
 »Risk register of those at risk from heatCQC reports on facilities in Reading all positive on 
these aspects.2023 Public Health Berkshire 
(lead)
H2  
Publicise cool public 
spaces  »Explore potential for air-conditioned places to be opened to the public 
during heatwaves
 »Maps and lists in libraries, public spaces, buses
 »Publicity in local media when heatwaves are forecast
 »Support tree planting initiatives and man-made (canopies) solutions
Links: Energy & LCD, Nature, Business, Communication and Engagement Completion and publication of list Initial list 2022
List updated yearlyReading Borough Council
RCAN
H3  
Increase the number of 
cooling public spaces/
nature-based solutions »Implement urban greening and tree-planting initiatives
 »Create man-made solutions where necessary (canopies) See action N1  
in Nature Theme
 55
Sub category: Flooding
Action name Description Targets and measure/milestone Target  
completion dateDelivery partners
H4  
Anticipation in health 
and social care facilities »Flexible accommodation for peak loads in emergencies
 »Flood risk planning and preparation for in-patient facilities 
Link: WaterEstablish baseline 2020 Public Health Berkshire 
(lead)
Reading Borough Council Set targets 2021
Plan published 2022
H5  
Minimising health 
impacts from flooding »Convene a group to determine what support is needed to minimise 
the health impacts from anticipated flooding and to make 
recommendations about appropriate interventions
Link: WaterGroup to report by end: 2022 RCAN
Sub category: Air pollution – see also Transport Theme Action Plan
Action name Description Targets and measure/milestone Target  
completion dateDelivery partners
H6  
Supporting citizens to 
self-manage air quality 
risks »Explore the application of dynamic real time air quality data to help 
citizens protect themselves
 »Raising awareness of green/ blue corridor and urban travel routes with 
lower pollution levels
 »Reach those most in need by prioritising areas measuring high 
pollution levels and areas of deprivation
 »Possible collaboration with Adept Live Lab project
Links: NatureTBC TBC Reading Borough Council  
(lead)
University of Reading
Adept Live Lab 
Stakeholders
Sub category: Infectious diseases
Action name Description Targets and measure/milestone Target  
completion dateDelivery partners
H7  
Minimising the  
health impacts from 
infectious diseases »Convene a group to determine what support is needed to minimise 
the health impacts from infectious diseases associated with 
climate change and to make recommendations about appropriate 
interventionsGroup to report by end: 2022 RCAN
 56
Sub category: Reducing emissions from the health sector in Reading
Action name Description Targets and measure/milestone Target  
completion dateDelivery partners
H8  
‘For a Greener NHS’ 
campaign »Adopting the national ‘For A Greener NHS’ campaign in Reading to 
determine the quickest feasible path to get the NHS to ‘net zero carbon’
 »Royal Berks NHS Foundation Trust to produce action plan subsequentlyNHS staff and establishments to feed into Expert 
Panel to report by Summer 2020 (local action plans 
to be produced subsequently)Q2-3 2020 Royal Berks NHS 
Foundation Trust
Other NHS facilities
H9  
Implementation of NHS 
Standard Contract »New national contract requiring hospitals to reduce carbon from 
buildings and estates, whilst switching to less polluting products, and 
encouraging more active travel for staffContract implemented Q2 2021 Royal Berks NHS 
Foundation Trust
H10  
Development of Green 
Plan for Royal Berks 
Hospital »New plan covering asset management, travel and transport, use of 
resources and greenhouse gas emissionsPlan completed Q2 2021 Royal Berks NHS 
Foundation Trust
H11  
Cooperation with local 
GP practices »Link GP practices with sustainability initiatives including ‘The Green 
Impact for Health Toolkit’20Health Theme Group to make contact with GPs or 
representative body2021 RCCP
RCAN
GP Practises
Sub category: Communication,  engagement and education
Action name Description Targets and measure/milestone Target  
completion dateDelivery partners
H12  
Cooperation with local 
health authorities »Create strong links to ensure climate change is at the centre of strategy
 »Initiate discussions with Health and Wellbeing Board  
https://democracy.reading.gov.uk/mgCommitteeDetails.aspx?ID=176Meet to determine next steps Q3 2020 RCAN lead
H13  
Cooperation with local 
planning authorities »Supporting Planning Team in climate impact assessment, ecosystem services tools 
and mitigation measures in relation to new builds and health and wellbeing of 
existing communities and future generationsMeet to determine next steps Q4 2020
H14  
Cooperation with 
Brighter Futures for 
Children and schools »Align with health and wellbeing targets
 »Connect with young people in their own right and as a route  
to influence their parents
 »Create repository of sustainable frameworks and climate change learning  
resources for schools
 »Increase tree and hedge planting in schools, for heat reduction and improving air quality
 »Support outdoor learning initiatives in school grounds and urban green spaces
Links: NatureMeet to determine next steps Q4 2020 RCAN
Brighter Futures  
for Children
Primary Schools
Secondary Schools
20 https://www.greenimpact.org.uk/giforhealth 57
Action name Description Targets and measure/milestone Target  
completion dateDelivery partners
H15  
Improve cooperation 
between RBC Parks 
and Open Spaces team, 
conservation and  
therapeutic nature and 
horticulture sectors »Increasing amount and quality of green space to enable residents to benefit from 
the improved physical and mental health
 »Mapping nature recovery priorities against indices of deprivation data to support 
people and wildlife where needed most
 »Supporting Reading Tree Strategy
 »Promoting green prescribing initiatives
Links: NatureOngoing – measure quality using 
Natural England’s guidanceOngoing Reading Borough Council
Nature Task Force
H16  
Publicise the health  
and well-being benefits 
to be gained from 
taking action on  
climate change »Awareness raising linking health & well-being with climate friendly choices, 
including diet (less food miles, less processing, more plant-based), travel choices 
and housing retrofit
 »Encourage behaviour change by highlighting positive impact of climate action,  
such as air quality improvements reducing asthma attacks and supporting  
brain development
 »Awareness raising to highlight the importance of greenspace to health and  
well-being and climate adaptation including boosting conservation volunteering 
and tree planting
Links: Education, Community, BusinessExplore carbon literacy training and 
positive climate action campaign 
tailored to specific target audiences2021 RCAN
Reading Green Christians
H17  
Support for mental 
health and wellbeing, 
targeting those 
suffering health 
inequalities »Extension of existing mental health programmes to include the mental health issues 
associated with heat, flooding or air pollution; also climate anxiety
 »Supporting the local nature sector to deliver green prescribing, especially for 
vulnerable groups
 »Sustainable greenspace management boosting biodiversity, carbon sequestration 
and supporting health and wellbeingExtended programme in place 2022 Reading Borough Council  
Public Health
H18  
Support the community 
gardening and food 
growing sector »Encourage the use of greenspace/ gardens for growing food in public and private 
spaces and educational opportunities
 »Education around healthy and climate-friendly diets, including basic cookery skills Measure number and size of spaces and 
volunteer numbersOngoing Reading Gardening for 
Health and Wellbeing 
Network
Food4Families
Reading Food  
Growing Network
H19  
Research, measuring 
and monitoring »Explore what data is already available on public health impacts of climate change 
in Reading
 »Identify data gaps and establish research projects
 »Measure, monitor and report on correlation of illnesses with climate change 
impacts to improve adaptation planning
 »Possible link with Lancet Countdown projectScoping meeting December 2019 
DONERCAN
University of Reading
 58
“I just wish there were greener options around me. I would 
really like to shop plastic free but that isn’t really possible 
with the options around in Caversham”6. COMMUNICATIONS AND ENGAGEMENT
6.1 Our ambition for community engagement in action on climate change
Our goal for climate action in our community is that everyone who lives, works, 
studies or plays in Reading understands Reading’s pathway to net zero carbon,  
is equipped with the knowledge, tools and support required to make their 
contribution to it, and takes ownership and responsibility for the corporate and 
individual action required to get there. 
Following the declaration of a climate emergency in 2019, an extensive programme  
of community engagement took place, following the guiding principles for City Climate 
Action Planning recommended by the International Council for Local Environmental 
Initiatives (ICLEI). This commenced with a public forum attended by over 120 people. 
This gathering identified the key themes for the strategy and led to the creation of 
theme groups which have been open for anyone to join since June 2019. The groups 
have been advertised online and via conventional media, meeting physically and 
virtually. The community-led theme groups have had a fundamental influence on the 
development of action plans within the Reading Climate Emergency Strategy.
Individuals and communities have a huge part to play in tackling the climate emergency 
via the choices they make and the signals they send through, for example, their 
purchasing and consumption decisions. We therefore need to equip them with the 
advice and tools they require to understand and reduce their impact on climate change.
The consultation process which informed development of this strategy highlighted the 
enthusiasm and commitment which the people of Reading are willing to bring to the 
challenge of tackling climate change. We asked what changes people would be willing 
to make to this end and a selection of responses is shown here.
6.2  A climate change communications and engagement plan for Reading
While the community in Reading is relatively engaged in the climate change debate, 
we know that we have a long way to go before we reach everyone. As such, we have 
developed a detailed communications and engagement plan, encompassing the 
launch of the final version of this strategy, and a programme of events and initiatives 
to support engagement of the whole community in its implementation. A summary  
of this plan is below.
“Cycle more, use the car less”
“We are discussing how to reduce our carbon emissions
in our street and are already changing behaviour”
“As a school we are particularly 
keen to make our building more
energy efficient and tackle the
issues of resources and food”
“My organisation is planning improvements to its
building and looking to a net zero
building and ways to reduce waste”“Helping with school walking trains”
“I’m veggie choosing not to own
a car and use plastic-free toiletries”
“To promote awareness and action in local
churches and to support local environmental NGO”Voices of Reading: A selection of quotes 
from contributors to our consultation
 59
Reading Climate Emergency Strategy 2020-25:
Communications & Engagement Plan summary
Sub category: General
Action name Description
(With bulleted list of activities needed to achieve action and links)Target and 
measure/milestone
(i.e. How will we know that we 
have completed the action?)Target 
completion 
dateAction owner
+ list of delivery 
partnersAny resource or 
capacity challenges?
(In funding, in skills, in capacity,  
missing key partners)
C1 
Information hub »Establish and maintain a hub on the website where all themes are 
supported with relevant, practical information for all stakeholders, so 
that everything is available in a single place
 »Mixture of bespoke content (Reading-centric) and signposts to reliable 
sources of information eg WRAP , Wildlife Trust, Energy Saving Trust, 
Carbon Trust etc
 »Supported by comms programme (conventional and social) to drive 
traffic
 »This should also have info on how we are doing. Achievements, 
measurement etc (does this need to be a separate workstream or do 
the theme heads take care of this?)Published Set up by November 
2020, continuously 
updated thereafterComms and 
Engagement Team
Theme leadsWebsite needs professional 
design to make sure it’s engaging 
and mobile-optimised
C2 
Dashboard »Develop a dashboard with KPIs that track progress against the targets 
in the strategy
 »Publish on the RCAN website but also strategic media around the 
town, eg large digital sign at the station, buses, The Oracle, Reading 
Borough Council venuesPublished Set up by 
December 2020 
and continuously 
updated thereafterRCAN Some of the indicators will be 
lagging, these needs to be clearly 
communicated
C3 
Brand Book and 
Stakeholder Map »Develop brand guidelines, style guide and messaging matrix
 »Confirm role of RCCP versus RCAN and relationship with other 
organisations within ReadingBrand Book and 
stakeholder map createdBy end September Comms and 
Engagement TeamWill need to be revised and 
updated after the governance 
audit is completed 
C4 
Campaign Calendar »Develop and publish a calendar of campaigns to encourage action on 
different issues, eg Beat the Street, Fair Trade Fortnight
 »Align with RBC campaigns and initiatives led by other organisations in 
the town, as well as national “days” eg Earth Day
 »Support with social media and conventional media such as bus 
advertising, outdoor, The Oracle, council magazineQuarterly Rolling Comms 
Plan devised and publishedBy November 2020 Comms and 
Engagement TeamMay require funding for creative 
and media
 60
Action name Description
(With bulleted list of activities needed to achieve action and links)Target and 
measure/milestone
(i.e. How will we know that we 
have completed the action?)Target 
completion 
dateAction owner
+ list of delivery 
partnersAny resource or 
capacity challenges?
(In funding, in skills, in capacity,  
missing key partners)
C5 
Climate Literacy 
Training »Offer carbon and climate training, tailored to support the RCAN Action 
Plan, to all who live, work or study in Reading
 »Begin by training all RBC staff
 »Potential to build on the University’s MOOC and/or Climate Reality 
training
 »Accreditation available from the UNEP endorsed Carbon  
Literacy ProjectDevelopment of training
Targets for delivery December 2021 RCAN Carbon Literacy accreditation 
depends on securing funding
C6 
Third party events »Take part in/support local public events eg Town Meal, Beanpole day, 
Waterfest, Meadows day, school fetes etc etcEvents calendar published 
and theme support agreed10 events per year RCAN Requires portable display 
materials as well as volunteer 
help
C7 
Funding hub »Establish and maintain a list of sources of outside funding that can be 
drawn on to support RCAN initiatives
 »Offer grants to support small local initiatives that align with RCAN 
goalsList Set up by end of 
2020, continuously 
updated thereafterRCAN Opportunity to offer advice 
on preparing bids subject to 
resource
C8 
Volunteer 
Programme »Work with Reading Voluntary Action to establish process to recruit 
volunteers to support delivery of RCAN activitiesRelationship built and 
process establishedDecember 2020 RCAN
RVA
C9 
Research 
Programme »Establish a research programme to support the actions  
in the strategy
 »Work with the University of Reading to develop a structured approach 
to matching research needs with students seeking research projectsProgramme developed  
and approach definedApril 2021 RCAN
University of 
Reading
C10 
Climate Action 
Pledge »Develop a pledge that residents can sign to commit to taking action 
on climate change across a relevant range of impacts
 »Possible “eco-journey” starting with simple things and becoming more 
advancedPledge defined  
and publishedNovember 2020 RCAN
 61
Sub category: Business Focus
Action name Description
(With bulleted list of activities needed to achieve action and links)Target and 
measure/milestone
(i.e. How will we know that we 
have completed the action?)Target 
completion 
dateAction owner
+ list of delivery 
partnersAny resource or 
capacity challenges?
(In funding, in skills, in capacity,  
missing key partners)
C11 
Climate-friendly 
Organisations 
Pledge »Define a set of commitments for organisations to sign up to in order to 
gain “Climate Friendly” statusPledge defined  
and publishedNovember 2020 RCAN
C12 
Climate-Aware 
Business »Embed climate change into the workstreams of the LEP , IOD, Chamber 
of Commerce and other local business networks
 »Work with leaders of those organisations to convince them of the 
strategic importance of climate change for their own organisations 
and their membershipAll nominated organisations 
have climate change as part 
of their missionSummer 2021 RBC
C13 
Lobbying for better 
business practice »Identify barriers preventing use of sanctions to address “carbon 
crimes”, eg:
- Leaving lights on all night in office buildings
- Having doors of restaurants/retail units open
- Incorporate the GHG Protool (Scope 1, 2 & 3) ?
 »Lobby central government for the policy changesIssues identified and 
lobbying programme 
launchedSpring 2021 RCAN
C14 
Reading Business 
Climate Action 
Network »Establish business network for sharing of expertise and knowledge on 
sustainable business
 »Hold regular events
 »Publish business-centric advice and guidance and signpost tools and 
models from reputable sources on the RCAN website
 »Encourage all Reading Businesses to nominate an employee who is 
their representative and can help to engage the company Network already launched
Events programme 
published
Information hub launchedNovember 2020 RCAN
Ethical Reading 
Sustainability 
Champions
C15 
Sustainable 
Business 
Accreditation »Investigate the suitability of BCorp and BITC frameworks and other 
accreditations
 »Ideally have a free-to-use dashboard system 
 »Introduce an accreditation scheme for businesses that recognises 
achievement at different levels, eg bronze, silver, gold, to create a race 
to the topResearch completed and 
proposal publishedSummer 2021 RCAN May require funding
 62
Action name Description
(With bulleted list of activities needed to achieve action and links)Target and 
measure/milestone
(i.e. How will we know that we 
have completed the action?)Target 
completion 
dateAction owner
+ list of delivery 
partnersAny resource or 
capacity challenges?
(In funding, in skills, in capacity,  
missing key partners)
C16 
Divestment »Divestment from fossil fuels is an important signal of intent  
as well as a way to divert capital investment from carbon-based  
to cleantech/Greentech innovation
 »Run a campaign encouraging all institutional investors  
in Reading to divestCampaign launched November 2021 RCAN
C17 
Business 
volunteering »Create opportunities for staff to support delivery of actions from the 
strategy via Team Challenge6 business actions a year First actions  
Q1 2021RCAN
Connect Reading
RBC
Nature Task Force
Econet
TCV
Sub category: Community Focus
Action name Description
(With bulleted list of activities needed to achieve action and links)Target and 
measure/milestone
(i.e. How will we know that we 
have completed the action?)Target 
completion 
dateAction owner
+ list of delivery 
partnersAny resource or 
capacity challenges?
(In funding, in skills, in capacity,  
missing key partners)
C18 
Working with other 
organisations »Establish links with other groups working on the sustainability agenda 
across Reading and showcase their work through the RCAN website
 »Enable sharing of events, expertise, knowledge and resources by other 
groupsPartner hub set up with 
ability for representatives to 
contribute contentPartner hub set  
up by end 2020Comms and 
Engagement team
C19 
Community focused 
work »Identify 2 geographical areas in Reading (up to 10 streets)– and 
support the residents in these streets to lead more Climate friendly 
lives.  Develop competition (eg ’green streets initiative’)
 »Identify and work with community groups (i.e. religious, ethnic, age 
related) – and support the members to lead more Climate friendly 
lives, through community talks and projects2 areas per year First area identified  
by Q2 2021RCAN
6 groups per year First group 
identified  
by Q1 2021
 63
Sub category: Education Focus
Action name Description
(With bulleted list of activities needed to achieve action and links)Target and 
measure/ milestone
(i.e. How will we know that we 
have completed the action?)Target 
completion 
dateAction owner
+ list of delivery 
partnersAny resource or 
capacity challenges?
(In funding, in skills, in capacity,  
missing key partners)
C20 
Schools-based 
interventions »Working with the Education team and Brighter Futures for Children, to 
establish a programme of climate change interventions for schools. 
 »To cover physical changes (i.e install solar panels, heat pumps etc) and 
support with lessons/curriculum/local community engagement (use Eco 
Schools framework?)
 »Draw on established tools and programmes where possibleProgramme launched September 2021 RCAN admin
Brighter Futures  
for Children
RBCwww.eco-schools.org.uk/ 
www.greenschoolsproject.org.uk/ 
www.wwf.org.uk/get-involved/
schools/green-ambassadors
www.youngclimatewarriors.org/
C21 
Reading Schools 
Climate Action 
Network »Establish teacher network for sharing of expertise and knowledge on 
sustainable schools (for primary and secondary)
 »Hold regular events
 »Publish school-centric advice and guidance and signpost tools and 
models from reputable sources
 »Link to home schooling networksNetwork launched
Events programme
Information hub launchedSeptember 2021 Brighter Futures  
for Children
RCANNature Task Force?
C22 
Model Climate 
Conference »Expand the model climate conference to include all schools in Reading
 »Bring the outputs back to the RCAN website
 »Legacy – Supporting the schools to make the changes they committed 
to on the day, through the RSCAN50% increase in schools 
participating in the Model 
Climate ConferenceNovember 2021 Just ideas Subject to funding
C23 
Young Persons  
Climate Assembly »Explore the potential to set up a Young Persons activist Network – for 
young people to meet up with like minded individuals to develop ideas 
and support
 »regular meetings, Intragram account?
 »Work with existing programmesResearch appetite and 
develop proposal if 
appropriateJune 2021 RCAN Must be youth led and with 
proper safeguarding
 64
7. GOVERNANCE, MONITORING  
 AND REPORTING
7.1  Monitoring and reporting
It is vital that progress in delivering both the aims and actions within the strategy  
is monitored so that corrective action can be taken if needed. With this in mind:
• Progress of delivery against action plans and targets will be monitored  
at quarterly meetings of the Reading Climate Change Partnership Board 
• A short annual report summarising progress will be prepared for the Board  
and published more widely
• In the fourth year of the five-year strategy a comprehensive review will  
be conducted to inform development of the fourth Reading climate change 
strategy to cover the period 2025-30.
When completed, the strategy will be available on the Reading Climate Change 
Partnership website (www.readingcan.org.uk). Theme groups will regularly post 
updates, which will both show progress on delivering action, as well as creating  
a useful information resource for Reading.
In addition, individual partners will of course take responsibility for monitoring  
and reporting on progress with their own carbon reduction and adaptation plans  
as appropriate to their organisations.
7.2 Governance
The many strands of activity proposed in this strategy represent an ambitious 
programme of activity which will require some co-ordination to maximise the impact 
of individual actions, avoid duplication and enable effective monitoring and reporting. 
We therefore aim to review the constitution and operating model of the Reading 
Climate Change Partnership Board, its relationship with its constituent partners and 
the Reading Climate Action Network, to address this. 
On the basis that form should follow function, now that the strategy is finalised,  
we have initiated a review of the Reading Climate Change Partnership to ensure that  
it is fit for the purpose of delivering the strategy over the next five years. This review 
will be completed within six months of the publication of the final strategy document.
 65GLOSSARY OF TERMS
Adaptation Adjustment designed to prepare for the consequences of a changing 
climate, e.g. floods or heat-waves.
Biodiversity The number and variety of organisms found in a particular habitat  
or eco-system – see also ‘resilience’.
Carbon emissions The release of carbon dioxide (CO 2) gases into the atmosphere.
Carbon footprint The total amount of greenhouse gas emissions caused directly  
or indirectly by an individual, group or organisation.
Carbon neutral Achieving an overall balance between CO 2 emissions produced  
and CO 2 emissions taken out of the atmosphere – see also ‘net zero’.
Carbon offsetting Attempting to compensate for CO 2 emissions by participating  
in schemes designed to make equivalent reductions of CO 2 in the atmosphere.
Carbon sequestration The process of removing CO 2 from the atmosphere.
Circular economy A concept which encourages more efficient use, and greater 
reuse and recycling, of materials through the economy, rather than the conventional 
approach of ‘take-make-waste’.
Decarbonisation The reduction or removal of CO 2 emissions from a product or process.
District energy system A local system for distributing heat generated in a centralized 
location for residential and commercial heating, generally using waste heat from local 
power plants or renewable energy.
Embodied carbon/energy The sum of energy or carbon involved in the production 
of goods and services, including the extraction and transportation of raw materials, 
manufacture, assembly and maintenance.
Green Deal A government scheme to retrofit buildings in order to make them more 
energy efficient, allowing householders to use future energy savings to pay for energy 
efficient measures to be installed in their homes.
Greenhouse gas emissions Gases which exaggerate the ‘greenhouse effect’, thus 
contributing to global warming – the main greenhouse gas being carbon dioxide 
(CO 2), but also methane (CH 4), nitrous oxide (N 2O), hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), 
perfluorocarbons (PFCs) and sulphur hexafluoride (SF6).
Heat supply networks The method of supplying heat to multiple buildings using 
waste heat from local power plants or renewable energy, as part of a district energy 
scheme.
Low carbon Generating relatively few carbon emissions.
Mitigation/climate mitigation Efforts to reduce or prevent the emission  
of greenhouse gases.Modal shift A change in the type of transport used.
Modes of transport Different methods of transport, such as car, public transport, 
walking and cycling.
Net zero/net zero carbon Achieving an overall balance between CO 2 emissions 
produced and CO 2 emissions taken out of the atmosphere – see also ‘carbon neutral’.
Quality of life The conditions in which we live, including social factors such 
education, environment, and physical and mental health, as well as material and 
economic factors.
Renewable energy Energy which is generated using natural resources which are 
renewed such as wind, sun, ground heat or biomass.
Resilience/climate resilience The ability to anticipate, prepare for, and respond 
to hazardous events, trends, or disturbances related to climate change – see also 
‘adaptation’.
Retrofit The addition of new technology or features into existing older buildings, 
often applies to energy efficiency measures.
Sharing economy An economy measured by social interactions and exchanges and 
sharing of goods.
Smart energy Systems which allow energy to be stored, and enables communication 
between the user and supplier, in order to provide a better understanding of variations 
in power supply and consumption.
Smart meter A device for recording and displaying the consumption of electricity in real-
time, for the purpose of monitoring energy use by both customers and energy suppliers.
Sustainable Capable of being maintained at a certain level without depleting natural 
resources.
Sustainable development Development that meets the needs of the present 
without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs. 
Sustainable Urban Drainage Systems (SuDS) An approach to drainage which 
attempts to mimic natural drainage and reduce the risk of flooding, through a range 
of techniques in developments and redevelopments.
 66
ACRONYMS
BAP Biodiversity Action Plan
BBOWT Berks, Bucks & Oxon Wildlife Trust
BC Borough Council
BEIS (Department for) Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy
BID Business Improvement District
CC County Council
CEHUK Centre for Ecology & Hydrology
DfT Department for Transport
EA Environment Agency
LA Local Authority
LRF Local Resilience Forum
MERL Museum of English Rural Life
RBC Reading Borough Council
RCES Reading Community Energy Society
RDNHS Reading and District Natural History Society
NTF Nature Task Force
RBCAN Reading Business Climate Action Network
RCAN Reading Climate Action Network
RCCP Reading Climate Change Partnership
RISC Reading International Solidarity Centre
RTWN Reading Tree Wardens Network
SECBE South East Centre for the Built Environment
SGN Southern Gas Networks
SSE Scottish and Southern Energy
TCV The Conservation Volunteers
TVB LEP Thames Valley Berkshire Local Enterprise Partnership
TW Thames Water
UoR University of Reading
Reading Climate Change Partnership:
info@readingcan.org.uk
www.readingcan.org.uk
 67
