StrategyCLIMATE  CHANGETHIS IS A REAL EMERGENCY  
THAT WE ARE FACING AND  
WE NEED TO ACT NOW  
TO PREVENT DEVASTATING IMPACT 
ON OUR CLIMATE AND OUR LIVES.CONTENTS
0105 - Foreword
0207 - Introduction0309 - Our Commitments
Efficient energy consumption
Sustainable transport
Waste and the Wider Environment
Working Together in Partnership
0417 - Case Studies
Efficient energy consumption
Sustainable transport
East Lancashire Cycleway
WasteFOREWORD
We are a small borough but we have our part 
to play – as does every individual who lives here 
and every business that trades here.
As a council, we can take action to make sure 
that we reach Carbon Zero by 2030 and this 
strategy sets the framework for achieving that 
goal.
We would like to see the whole borough reach 
the same target by the same date and we will 
be working in partnership with you to do that.
Everyone has a role to play simply by the 
personal choices we make. For example in the 
way we travel and use energy, by planting a tree 
or just passing on the message.  Please join us 
and help us to reach our target and do our bit in 
the fight against climate change.
Cllr Julie Adshead
Member Champion for Climate Change We recognise that our council has an important 
role to help our residents and businesses to 
capture the opportunities and benefits of action 
on climate change.
These include saving money on energy bills, 
generating income from renewable energy, 
supporting new sources of energy, managing 
local flood-risk and water scarcity and protecting 
our natural environment. This Strategy and Action 
Plan sets out our commitment to achieving our 
goals in relation to reducing our carbon footprint. 
Neil Shaw
Chief Executive for Rossendale Borough CouncilIn September 2019, Rossendale Borough Council 
declared a ‘Climate Emergency’ and pledged 
to take action.  This is a real emergency that we 
are facing and we need to act now to prevent 
devastating impact on our climate and our lives.
EVERYONE
HAS A ROLE  
TO PLAYIntroduction
As a council we are passionately committed 
to improving the environment.  The world’s 
climate is changing and we are keen to do 
all we can to take positive action locally to 
make a contribution to reducing our carbon 
consumption and tackling climate change.
We are clear that human activities are leading 
to climate change at a scale and pace that 
threatens our quality of life and that of future 
generations. Such a global challenge requires a 
global response, and we are keen to do our bit at 
a local level and provide leadership on this issue 
which is becoming of increasing public concern.
The UK Government has agreed to take a 
lead globally by setting a target of net zero 
greenhouse gas emissions by 2050. In 2019 the 
council formally declared a ‘climate emergency’ 
and committed to taking urgent action.
Everyone has a role to play. We are keen to show 
strong local leadership on this issue but know this 
cannot be achieved alone. Introduction
A crucial part of this strategy is to foster the 
energy of all those living and working in 
Rossendale to make a difference to all our 
futures. This will include working with local 
businesses on steps to become net zero emitters 
of carbon.
We will work with local communities to promote 
greater awareness of the role they can play 
in reducing their carbon consumption and 
providing practical approaches to reduce, 
reuse and recycle. Mobilising our young people 
will be a crucial aspect, and by working with 
our schools and colleges we can develop new 
and innovative ways to change behaviour and 
reduce our collective impact on the environment.
We are already doing much to make a positive 
impact on climate change, such as sustainable 
transport, recycling and insulating homes. This 
ambitious strategy goes further than ever before 
to protect our environment by working together 
to have a positive impact both locally and 
globally.0203Our Commitments
Our aims are to make the council’s activities  
net-zero carbon by 2030 and to work in 
partnership to reduce carbon emissions for the 
whole of Rossendale.
Currently, in Rossendale, each person is 
responsible for an average of ten tonnes of 
carbon emissions each year. This equates to 24 
million balloons per person. It is our aim to reduce 
that figure significantly. Through its corporate 
strategy the Council is committed to, and already 
working towards, a cleaner and greener borough.
TO REDUCE CARBON EMISSIONS AND IMPROVE 
OUR ENVIRONMENT, THE COUNCIL WILL FOCUS 
ON THE FOLLOWING AREAS:
 Efficient energy consumption;
 Sustainable transport;
 Waste and the wider environment;
 Working together in partnership.Our Commitments
We will not achieve the impact that we all wish 
to see by acting alone, and we are committed 
to bringing together statutory partners, the 
voluntary, education and business sectors 
and our communities to reduce our collective 
impact on the environment.  
Rossendale has been deeply impacted recently 
by the Covid 19 outbreak. This has prompted 
major changes in people’s behaviours and it has 
demonstrated how we can reduce our reliance 
on carbon-based travel and make a switch to 
cycling and walking.
We must embrace this opportunity to change 
behaviours permanently and empower our 
young people to be vocal ambassadors for 
greater environmental awareness.
This will all develop over time, but this strategy 
and the action plan that will deliver its aims will 
lay the foundations for a much broader social 
movement that allows everyone to play their 
part.3.1 EFFICIENT ENERGY CONSUMPTION
We believe that a key contribution to tackling 
climate change is both a reduction in the overall 
consumption of energy and the adoption of 
more renewable energy sources to fulfil our local 
demand.  We will show community leadership 
by reducing our own overall carbon-based 
energy consumption and actively move to more 
renewable sources of energy generation.
By better understanding the council’s current 
carbon ‘footprint’ we will be able to measure our 
success in reducing this.
We will work with local businesses and housing 
providers to encourage them to adopt similar 
approaches, particular in higher energy 
consuming businesses like manufacturing. We 
will promote energy saving initiatives to local 
communities to encourage the wider take up of 
such approaches.WE WILL FOCUS ON DRIVING THE FOLLOWING OUTCOMES:
  Reaching a carbon-zero position for the Council’s activities by 2030;
 
 Reducing the Council’s overall energy consumption by 50 percent by 2030; 
  Obtaining our energy needs from renewable sources;
  Increasing the number of businesses and housholds who source their utilities from renewable 
sources.
TO ACHIEVE THIS, WE WILL FOCUS ON THE FOLLOWING OBJECTIVES:
  Commission an assessment of the Council’s carbon footprint;
  Identify ways to reduce the consumption of energy in council owned buildings;
  Work with local housing associations and private sector landlords to increase home insulation 
and adopt other energy efficiency measures, identifying government funding where possible;
  Review our planning guidelines and use these to encourage new buildings that have a lower 
carbon footprint both in construction and operation;
  Support energy switching schemes that enable more residents to move to energy providers 
using renewable sources;
  Engage in a public education campaign to promote the benefits of reduced energy use and 
switching to renewables.3.2 SUSTAINABLE TRANSPORT
Nearly 30 percent of all carbon emissions 
are due to transport. Moving to more 
environmentally sustainable forms of transport will 
play a signifigant role in reducing overall carbon 
emissions.
This includes replacing older heavily polluting 
vehicles with newer technologies and people 
using vehicles less. We will improve our vehicles 
whilst also promoting healthier travel options 
such as walking and cycling.  
The Council’s development of the new bus 
station in Rawtenstall is a visible commitment to 
our approach for better public transport and we 
are keen to work with government on even more 
ambitious developments in the future such as a 
modern rail route into Great Manchester.WE WILL FOCUS ON DRIVING THE FOLLOWING OUTCOMES:
 Moving all council fleet vehicles away from carbon-based diesel/petrol power;
  Increasing the proportion of our staff who are taking more sustainable forms of transport to get 
to work;
 Increasing the proportion of local people who are walking or cycling to work.
TO ACHIEVE THIS, WE WILL FOCUS ON THE FOLLOWING OBJECTIVES:
  The use of electric pool cars for staff so that no work mileage uses petrol / diesel-powered vehicles;
  Switching all council owned vehicles from petrol / diesel to electric; 
  Support staff who wish to walk or cycle to work by providing good changing facilities and 
promote the bike to work scheme;
 
 Install rapid electric car charging points across the Borough;
  Work with local public transport providers and Lancashire County Council to promote public 
transport options for work;
  Encourage more sustainable travel within the Borough through publicising walking and cycling routes;
  Continuing to seek external funding for sustainable transport infrastructure projects, in particular 
a fast rail link to Greater Manchester and the North West;
  Promote the wider take up of cycling and improve the Borough’s cycling infrastructure;
  Work with local businesses towards eco-friendly fleet.3.3 WASTE AND THE WIDER ENVIRONMENT
The reduction in certain waste streams such as 
single-use plastics can play a role in the fight 
against climate change. More so, the production 
of energy from waste can make a considerable 
contribution. Waste reduction and recycling also 
benefit our environment in other ways and affect 
the legacy that we leave for future generations.
Each year our residents create around 23,600 
tonnes of domestic waste. We are proud that we 
already play a leading role in making better use 
of the Borough’s waste. Currently around 7,400 
tonnes of this is sent for recycling each year. This 
is a good start but we need to do more. Currently 
we recycle around 33% of the borough’s 
domestic waste but the average English borough 
council is recycling around 49%.
Businesses also generate significant levels 
of waste and we are keen to explore ways 
businesses can reduce the level of resources 
they consume and maximise the level of waste 
which can be recycled.
We also need to look at issues such as land use 
and afforestation in the fight against climate 
change. Alongside this, there needs to be a 
focus on biodiversity and ecosystems in order to 
protect our environment for future generations as 
well as mitigating against some of the effects of 
climate change such as flooding.WE WILL FOCUS ON DRIVING THE FOLLOWING OUTCOMES:
 Increasing the proportion of domestic waste which is recycled or used for energy production;
 Reducing certain waste streams;
 Increasing tree cover;
  Enhancing biodiversity.TO ACHIEVE THIS, WE WILL FOCUS ON THE FOLLOWING OBJECTIVES:
  Work with Lancashire County Council to incentivise recycling and 
increase recycling and re-use rates to 45% by 2025;
  Increase the number of residents taking up the garden waste service 
by 10 percent per annum over the next three years;
  Increase the proportion of local commercial waste which is recycled 
by 50 percent per annum over the next three years through a 
Council scheme for commercial waste collection and disposal and 
additional promotion;
  Introduce food waste collection;
  Investigate the possibilities of using our waste for energy production;
 Identify council owned sites suitable for increased tree coverage;
  Work with local businesses, communities and schools on a major tree 
planting scheme;  
  Ban the procurement of single use plastics for all council services and 
events by June 2022;
 Embed carbon reduction objectives in major procurement activities;
  Encourage other public service providers to adopt carbon reduction 
initiatives;
  Review all Council procurement to achieve the best value balance 
between cost and environmental harm;
   Engage in a public education programme promoting local 
organically grown produce;
  Identify areas in the Borough to work on the enhancement of 
biodiversity and climate change mitigation schemes.3.4 WORKING TOGETHER IN PARTNERSHIP
To achieve our ambitions and make a real 
impact, we need to work together in partnership. 
We can all make a positive difference to our 
carbon footprints.We know that a new house can involve the 
production of 50 tonnes of carbon and by 
working with local housing providers and through 
government grants this could possibly be reduced.
We know that transport and older vehicles can 
be a major contributor to carbon emissions and 
other harmful pollutants. Promoting more efficient 
vehicles could help reduce these pollutants. 
We want to identify leaders in each sector to 
champion change and to share the many 
opportunities that exist for reducing emissions.   We also know that the willingness and 
enthusiasm to address climate change has 
never been greater and that young people 
can be very powerful influencers.  By working 
with schools and colleges, we can harness this 
enthusiasm to encourage behaviour change 
across all age groups.  
This strategy sets out clear actions for the 
council. But it also establishes the building blocks 
for a much broader partnership to tackle the 
climate emergency.
TO WORK IN PARTNERSHIP AND HAVE THE MAXIMUM POSSIBLE IMPACT ON IMPROVING OUR COLLECTIVE 
CARBON FOOTPRINT, WE WILL:
  Hold a Rossendale Climate Change Conference that brings people together to share ideas and 
to pledge to work together on the climate emergency and to protect our environment;
  Establish Climate Change Champions across all sectors and support them to create wider 
networks for action.Case Studies044.1 EFFICIENT ENERGY CONSUMPTION
 CASE STUDY: FUTURES PARK SOLAR PANELS
In 2012 Rossendale Borough Council installed 
solar panels on its Futures Park offices. The 
installation of the solar panels was a £112,000 
investment for our future within a 25 year plan.
 
In the eight years since the solar panels were 
installed they have produced 553,043 KWH 
of electricity and for every KWH produced we 
receive 11.5p from the Government subsidy - 
The Feed in Tariff (FIT). Over this period the total 
FIT is £63,599.
 
Through the solar panels, we are producing 
approximately a third of the electricity we need 
for Futures Park therefore we no longer need to 
purchase this from the National Grid at the cost 
12.5 per KWH making an annual approximate 
saving of £4,000 and a total saving over the 
eight years of £32,000.
 
Unused electricity produced through the solar 
panels is exported back into the National Grid 
for which we are paid 4.5p KWH.  Annually this 
equates to £1,500.
£32,000
Saved in the 8 years since investment in solar panels4.2 SUSTAINABLE TRANSPORT
 CASE STUDY: ELECTRONIC INFRASTRUCTURE
Rossendale Borough Council and six other 
local authorities have set out to improve 
the infrastructure of their respective districts. 
Together they set out a tender to formally 
develop electric charging point infrastructures 
within the districts aimed in particular at the 
taxi and private hire trade.
Rossendale Borough Council went about this 
procedure after consulting other councils about 
their electric taxis. This led to a company doing 
consultation work with RBC to produce and show 
RBC and taxi owners the positives in switching to 
electric vehicles.
The company in question ran a workshop for RBC 
staff and councillors to show why electric charging 
point infrastructure is going to be needed. It 
was decided that RBC and the six other local 
authorities would join together in a bid to gain 
funding to develop charging points within each 
council’s district. The charging points are being 
constructed for taxis, but members of the public 
are free to use them when they are not in use.
4.2 SUSTAINABLE TRANSPORT
 CASE STUDY: EAST LANCASHIRE CYCLEWAY
The creation of an East Lancashire Strategic 
Cycleway Network was proposed in the East 
Lancashire Highways and Transport Masterplan, 
which was approved in February 2014.
The masterplan sets out the transport priorities for 
East Lancashire until 2021.
PRIORITIES WITHIN THE MASTERPLAN INCLUDE:
   Improving access to areas of economic 
growth and regeneration;
  Providing better access to education and 
employment;
 Improving people’s quality of life.
The Valley of Stone is 16.5km long and connects 
Rawtenstall to Waterfoot, Bacup and Whitworth to 
the Lancashire border with Rochdale at Healey 
Dell, as well as providing access to employment 
sites, communities and linking towns along the 
Rossendale valley.It is built on the former railway line and when 
completed will provide a sustainable travel 
alternative to using the busy roads which run 
along the main valley floor.4.3 WASTE AND THE WIDER ENVIRONMENT
 CASE STUDY: WASTE
There are challenges in increasing recycling and achieving efficiencies in waste collection, in a 
borough as rural and diverse as Rossendale.
The fact that the council must collect waste 
from several different property types – including 
terraced housing, houses with multiple 
occupants, medium density flats, hard to reach 
properties – means that finding a solution that 
meets the needs of citizens, as well as the 
aspirations of a sustainable borough, is difficult. 
There can be no “one-size-fits-all” solution, and 
we need to work with communities to tackle 
waste and improve recycling across Rossendale.
We also know that in some of the terraced areas 
of the borough, recycling rates are quite low, 
which is challenged further in areas of rented 
accommodation. This is a challenge that must be 
met with greater support and improved education.
More broadly, the world market for waste is 
changing, meaning that, as a borough, we will 
all have to do more.Unless we do so, the financial cost of dealing with 
waste in the borough, not to mention the global 
environmental cost, will simply become too high.
A strategy will play an important role in helping 
to keep Rossendale streets clean in addition to 
waste and recycling benefits. 
The Council’s Recycling and Waste 
Management Strategy is to be reviewed every 
three years, with the initial strategy covering the 
period 2019-22.“ The eyes of all future generations 
are upon you... ”
Greta ThunbergRossendale Borough Council
The Business Centre
Futures Park
Bacup
OL13 0BB Cover Photo Credit: John Hartley ©