Scottish Borders Council – 17 December 2020 
CLIMATE CHANGE ACTION  PLAN  TIMELINE
Report by Executive  Director, Finance & Regulatory
SCOTTISH BORDERS COUNCIL 
17 December 2020
1 PURPOSE AND SUMMARY
1.1 This report provides an update  on the development of a Climate  
Change Action Plan and proposes a slightly amended timeline for 
the delivery of the Plan.
1.2At its meeting of 25 September 2020, Scottish Borders  Council agreed a 
series of recommendations contained within the report ‘Responding  to the 
Climate Emergency’.   One  of the recommendations agreed  was that the 
Council set out a clear plan of action to reduce our carbon emissions  and 
other greenhouse gases,  such a plan to return to Council for consideration 
before the end of March  2021.
1.3  A timeline has been developed  which sets out the details of the preparatory 
actions required to deliver  such a plan.  These  actions  include  the 
identification of strategic  themes, provision of planning workshops for each 
theme, assessing and identifying an approach to both corporate and 
regional emissions baseline  development  and maintenance,  structuring 
corporate governance and reporting  processes across climate change  
issues, and developing proposals for Council  wide staff training and 
engagement. 
1.4It has emerged  from this planning approach however, that the original  
March timescale  cannot now be achieved.  It is requested that in order to 
produce a robust strategic approach to the development of a net zero 
pathway within a Climate  Change  Action Plan, that the timescale is 
extended by 3 months, with an Action Plan presented to Council in June 
2021. 
1.5   It should be emphasized that re-scheduling Council’s consideration of the 
Climate Action  Plan does not inhibit Council’s  ability to progress  existing 
Climate Action.  For  example, the Energy Efficiency  Programme continues to 
deliver carbon and cost savings through  a programme of energy efficiency 
and renewable energy retrofit.  It does mean  that the strategic overview of 
activity will be delayed  in being brought before Council, but it is considered 
that the benefits in taking  limited additional time to strengthen the Climate 
Action Plan meaningfully outweigh  any deficits caused by the delay  in 
presentation of the Plan.Scottish Borders Council – 17 December 2020    
2 RECOMMENDATION
2.1 It is recommend that the Council agrees  the Climate Change Action 
Plan Timeline,  in particular that a Climate  Change Action Plan is 
considered by the Council  before the end of June 2021. 
3 BACKGROUND
3.1At its meeting on 25 September 2020, Scottish Borders  Council agreed a 
series of recommendations contained within the report ‘Responding  to the 
Climate Emergency’.   One  of the recommendations agreed  was that the 
Council ‘set out a clear plan of action to reduce our carbon emissions and 
other greenhouse gases,  such plan to return  to Council for consideration 
before the end of March  2021’.
3.2Significant preparatory work has been undertaken by a core group of staff 
within the Council’s Sustainable Development Group, and the attached 
timeline for this work (Appendix 1) has been produced.
4 CLIMATE CHANGE ACTION PLAN DEVELOPMENT 
4.1A number of key steps have been identified in the production  of a Climate 
Change Action Plan, with considerable effort invested in assessing the 
impact of Scottish Government policy drivers, guidance and support.  Much 
activity has also focussed  on engagement with partners  around strategic  
climate change priorities  for the Scottish Borders,  particularly the Edinburgh 
and South  East Scotland  City Regional and Borderlands  Growth  Deals, and 
relationships with the South of Scotland Enterprise Energy Transition Group.  
4.2The key stages  of Climate  Change Action Plan production  have been 
identified in the Timeline  and are structured around 3 phases – Analysis, 
Planning and Implementation.   As can be seen from the Timeline, significant 
progress has been made  in the assessment of approaches used by other  
public bodies, scoping of the Action Plan, identification of 4 strategic themes 
and the investigation  of an appropriate emissions baseline methodology  
against which  progress can be measured. The Timeline sets out the steps 
required in order  to produce an Action Plan which can be presented to the 
Council in June 2021.
4.3The Analysis  Phase of the process has been essential to allow detailed  
specification of activity  required in the Planning Phase.   It became evident  
during the Analysis that a number of circumstances which had been in place 
at the time of writing  of the 25th September  report ‘Responding  to the 
Climate Emergency’,  had changed.   An example of this was the extension to 
the timescale for the development of a Borderlands Energy Masterplan, 
which was referenced in the 25th September report.  It was previously 
expected that this process  would have provided emissions  baselines  for 
each of the relevant Local Authorities by March 2021, however, this will not 
now be available until later in the year, therefore work is developing to 
establish an initial standalone  baseline for the Scottish Borders.Scottish Borders Council – 17 December 2020 4.4A widespread issue which has affected the original timeline  for the 
production of a Climate  Change Action Plan is related to the availability and 
capacity of staff across all Council services. Many  teams are still being 
redeployed and focused on COVID related work, and for those who have 
stepped down  from emergency  response  roles, increasing service delivery 
demands and potential backlogs  require  to be addressed.  These 
circumstances have affected not only Council  staff, but also many external 
partners, resulting in reduced  availability  of officers to progress key 
elements of the Planning  Phase of the original  Timeline.
4.5   In light of these  issues, it is apparent that the original March timescale 
cannot now be achieved.   It is proposed that in order  to deliver  a robust 
strategic approach  to the development of a net zero pathway within  a 
Climate Change Action Plan, that the original timescale is extended by 3 
months, with an Action  Plan presented to Council  in June 2021. 
4.6   Officers will keep the Sustainable Development Committee and Elected 
Members generally updated in relation to progress  with the development of 
the Climate Action Plan through  to the end of June 2021.
 
5 IMPLICATIONS
5.1 Financial 
There are no costs directly  attached to any of the recommendations  
contained in this report.
5.2 Risk and Mitigations
There is a limited reputational  risk to the Council in extending the deadline  
for the production of a Climate Change Action Plan.  However,  the priority  is 
to produce  a Climate  Action Plan which provides  the strongest  possible basis 
for progress.  It  is considered that outcomes will be improved by taking 
some additional time to develop a stronger Action Plan than would be 
achievable in the limited  timeframe  which now exists.
5.3 Integrated  Impact Assessment
No Integrated  Impact Assessment has been prepared on the basis that the 
present report is concerned solely  with the timing of a future Council Report  
and Climate Action  Plan.  An Integrated Impact Assessment will be required 
in relation to that future report and Climate Action  Plan. 
5.4 Acting Sustainably 
Re-scheduling of the Council’s consideration of the Climate Action Plan does 
not inhibit Council’s  ability to progress existing  Climate Action.  It does 
mean that the strategic overview  of activity  will be delayed in being  brought 
before Council, and this may consequently mean  a small delay  in the 
development of the Climate Change Action  Plan, and the concerted  and 
accelerated action in combatting  Climate  Change which that report is 
intended to engender. However, it is considered that the benefits in taking 
limited additional time to strengthen the Climate Action Plan meaningfully 
outweigh any deficits  caused by the delay in presentation of the Plan. 
5.5 Carbon ManagementScottish Borders Council – 17 December 2020 As per para 5.4, it is considered that the benefits in taking  limited additional 
time to strengthen the Climate  Action Plan meaningfully  outweigh  any 
deficits caused by the delay in presentation of the Plan. 
5.6 Rural  Proofing
The present  report does not concern  a new or amended policy or strategy.  
The substantive  covering report to the Climate Action Plan will require to be 
assessed for impact  in this regard.
5.7 Changes to Scheme of Administration or Scheme  of Delegation
No changes are required to the Scheme of Administration or the Scheme of 
Delegation as a result of the proposals  in this report.  
6 CONSULTATION
6.1The Monitoring Officer/Chief  Legal  Officer, the Chief Officer Audit and Risk, 
and the Service  Director  HR & Communications,  have been consulted and 
any comments received have been incorporated into the final report.
Approved by
David Robertson Signature ……………………………………..
Executive Director (Finance and Regulatory)
Author(s)
Name Designation and Contact Number
Louise Cox
Michael Cook Environmental Strategy  Co-ordinator
Corporate Policy Advisor  
Background Papers:  
Previous Minute Reference:  Scottish Borders Council,  25 September 2020
Note – You can get this document on tape, in Braille, large print and various computer 
formats by contacting the address below.   Jenny  Wilkinson can also give information on 
other language  translations as well as providing additional copies.
Contact us at Jenny Wilkinson, Scottish Borders Council, Council HQ, Newtown St 
Boswells, Melrose, TD6 0SA  Tel:  01835 825004  Email:  
jjwilkinson@scotborders.gov.uk 