APPENDIX
Net Zero 2030
Executive Summary
As the Leader of the Council I am setting a clear ambition  for the Council to achieve 
net zero greenhouse gas emissions by 2030 (‘Net Zero 2030’).  This report and 
appendix sets out actions  towards  meeting this target.
Recommendations
It is recommended that:
a)Council support  and endorse the ambition and actions set out in this report  
and appendix;  and,
b)Cabinet be asked to establish a Cabinet Working Group to oversee and lead 
the ongoing development and implementation of the Council’s transition to 
Net Zero 2030.
Reason for Recommendation
It is clear all organisations and individuals have a role to play in reducing greenhouse 
gas emissions.  This work must be undertaken fully and enthusiastically if the 
Council, its community and its partners are to achieve Net Zero.  The Council has an 
enviable reputation as a forward-thinking authority which leads  by example,  
implements policies which improve  its District and embraces innovation.  The aims 
and actions set out in this report  apply  that approach to the climate change 
challenge.
Introduction & Background
1.International efforts to minimise climate  change are generally recognised to 
have substantively begun in 2015 with the Paris Agreement, which led to the 
October 2018 Intergovernmental  Panel  on Climate Change report.   The history  
is summarised  in the following  extract from the House of Commons Library 
Briefing Paper,  ‘Legislating for net zero’ (reproduced under the Open 
Parliament Licence v3.0).
“The UK is a Party to the UN Framework  Convention on Climate Change  
(UNFCCC) and has signed  and ratified the Paris Agreement: an 
international agreement  on climate change. The key aim of the Paris 
Agreement is to hold the increase  in the global average temperature to 
well below  2°C above pre-industrial  levels and pursue efforts  to limit the 
temperature increase to 1.5°C. The Agreement also included a widely-
acknowledged net zero global  greenhouse gas emissions  aim for the 
second half of this century.“Following the Paris Agreement,  the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate  
Change (IPCC)  published  a Special Report  in October 2018 which found  
that limiting global warming to 1.5°C is possible but would require 
unprecedented “rapid and far reaching” changes in all aspects  of society, 
including a need to reach ‘net zero’  by around 2050.”
2.The UK Government responded by commissioning the Committee  on Climate 
Change (‘CCC’) to determine what steps the UK would need to take to achieve 
net-zero greenhouse gas emissions.   The CCC concluded their work in May and 
the Government accepted  their findings, amending the Climate Change Act 
2008 in June to introduce a target for at least a 100% reduction of greenhouse 
gas emissions (compared to 1990 levels)  in the UK by 2050.
3.The IPCC report  observed that a large proportion  of the necessary reduction 
in greenhouse gas reductions must take place before 2030 if warming is to be 
successfully limited.  It is therefore recognised this should be the target for 
achieving net zero wherever possible.  This target is referred to as Net Zero 
2030.
Local Government’s Response
4.Whilst there is currently no legal requirement for local authorities to act, 
councils are well placed to respond  both as organisations in their own right as 
well as bodies which  enjoy a position of influence and leadership within  their 
communities.
5.A number of councils have declared  a ‘Climate Emergency’.  It would  appear, 
however, that many  see the declaration  itself as the fulfilment of their 
obligation with little detail as to what this means for each council and what, 
if any, action they intend to take.
Our Commitment to Net Zero
6.It is proposed  that this Council unambiguously commits to working towards 
Net Zero 2030 and introduces policies which deliver  that aim.
7.In recognition that this is a complex, challenging and serious  topic which 
should reach the core of decision making,  it is also proposed  Council  asks 
Cabinet to establish a Cabinet  Working Group  to oversee  the ongoing 
development and implementation  of the Council’s transition to Net Zero 
2030.
8.Set out in Appendix A are initial policies  and actions  for the Council to deliver, 
Stage 1, and on which the Cabinet Working  Group can build, Stage 2, 
overseeing measures which are specific,  measurable, achievable,  realistic 
and time bound.9.Members  will note that many of the policies proposed are fully aligned with 
the commitments  contained in the Council Plan: placing  wellbeing at the 
heart of everything we do; employing our values of excellence, value  for 
money, and innovation;  and, working  together to improve the District’s 
environment, economy,  housing,  safety and health.
10.The Council  will use its position to communicate the steps it is taking and to 
exercise local leadership in helping others meet  their environmental 
obligations.
Conclusions
11.The Council has already  been engaging in activities to improve its 
environmental footprint: moving  away from landfill;  replacing diesel vehicles 
with electric; beginning an ambitious charging point rollout; introducing 
environmental standards in planning policies; and, moving our offices to LED 
lighting.
12.It is now recommended that the Council rises to the challenges  posed  by 
climate change, responding positively  and constructively to achieve Net Zero 
2030.
Other Options Considered and/or Rejected
None.  The internationally accepted  scientific evidence demonstrates the necessity 
of achieving net zero greenhouse gas emissions by 2050, if not before.
Key Implications
Financial
There are no financial implications associated  with this report.   If constituted, the 
proposed Cabinet Working Group will consider  the resources  necessary to deliver the 
Council’s Net Zero 2030 actions  and policies.
Legal Implications and Risk Assessment Statement
There are no legal implications.
Equality Assessment
The decisions recommended in this report have a remote or low relevance  to the 
substance of the Equality Act.  There  is no perceived  impact on end users.Appendix A: Net Zero Actions
Sevenoaks District Council will fully and enthusiastically move to Net Zero 
2030. To achieve  this we will deliver the following:   
Stage 1: Immediate actions and commitments
Write to the Secretary of State  to demand  any local powers  needed  to 
achieve this commitment and the resources to match  these powers
Establish  a Cabinet Working Group to oversee the production and delivery of 
our Net Zero 2030 commitments, working across the council towards  this 
commitment
Audit our current  and future  levels  of energy  use and greenhouse gas 
emissions, their subsequent environmental impact and develop  plans to 
address their use
Hold a Green Summit in Spring/Summer 2020 bringing together groups, 
organisations, companies and experts  to engage and inspire  residents
Embrace the opportunities presented by Net Zero to secure broader 
environmental improvements
Support the delivery of Kent and Medway’s Energy and Low Emissions 
Strategy
Help householders and businesses  improve  energy  efficiency by providing 
free advice  and support for energy improvements and energy saving  
Require bidders for all tenders to include an environmental  statement, 
including their plan for achieving Net Zero,  a ‘Net Zero Commitment’
Report  and promote  our actions  towards  Net Zero,  and support  our partners 
including landowners, residents,  businesses and visitors to our District to 
play their part
Encourage the location of clean growth businesses in our District, with the 
aim of developing a clean  growth hub
Work  with schools, local communities and groups to create community 
transport hubs for short  journeys, minimising pollution, improving air quality  
and reducing congestion.
Deliver  the environmental  aspects of Sevenoaks District Councils  Council and 
Local Plans  
Participate in and promote World Car Free Day on 22 September 2020Stage 2: Actions and Commitments to be further investigated by the Cabinet 
Working Group
Move to a renewable electricity supplier in 2020
Roll out “free” electric car charging points  across our car park estate
Continue our transition to a zero-emissions vehicle fleet (this is a vehicle 
that emits no exhaust gas from the on board source of power) wherever 
practicable
Require the installation of electric  vehicle  charging points  in all new 
developments, both residential and non-residential
Bring in incentives for taxi drivers to use vehicles with zero tailpipe emission 
by amending licensing  policy
Give a free tree for every new home built
Explore  opportunities  to invest in clean growth such as a local Net Zero Bank 
to finance energy efficiency  and carbon  reduction
Develop an electric  vehicle car club, to promote the use of zero-emissions 
vehicle, to improve  air quality  in our District and produce  an income  to 
support council services
Provide  a one year 100% reduction  on the District Council element  of council 
tax for new certified  Passivhaus ‘Classic’,  ‘Plus’  & ‘Premium’  homes  built in 
the District,  in any year until 2030 
In all new SDC and SDC owned  company  developments, set an ambitious 
stretch target for sustainable  homes  in line with the London Plan
Where  everything  possible has been done to achieve zero carbon but there 
is still a shortfall, take action  through offsetting carbon dioxide emissions 
where necessary,  and explore  a Carbon Offset Fund to finance this
Work  with the local government family within Kent to deliver Net Zero 
across all our communities
Look across local government both in the UK and beyond to find further  
appropriate and deliverable  ideas  and initiatives 