A 10 Point Plan for climate 
action
WORKING DRAFT 
Sheffield City Council
2021 -2023
Page 19A Sheffield for people and for the planet
HOLDING SPACE FOR INTRODUCTION
.
Page 20Forward
This plan lays out a framework for how the Council proposes to work with the city to address the shared challenge of the clim atecrisis. It is fundamentally a Council document, 
and it focuses on our approach to moving forward, but at the heart of it is the recognition that we can not do what is needed alone.
It might be helpful to lay out what the plan is and is not:
This plan is:
•A framework for how we will act in the short term as we increase our work with the city and with others.
•Built on the evidence that we currently have available to us. There are gaps in our understanding and more work will need to be undertaken over time.
•Integrated. It covers both direct and indirect carbon emissions as well as climate resilience.
This plan is not:
•Perfect. We are facing a climate emergency and this plan is a next step.
•Static. The field is fast changing –policy, finance, technology, the markets and public opinion are all changing, and our plans will need to adapt as the world around 
us changes. This means that we do not have all the answers now, and we will need to work with uncertainty.
•A fully costed delivery plan which details the exact route for the city to 2030. The plan commits to developing more detailed delivery plans that will involve people, 
businesses and organisations and will be consulted on. Even these delivery plans are unlikely to be fully costed at the start : the scale and pace of change means that 
we will need to think differently about our approach to strategy and action.
•A commitment by the Council to fund or deliver all the changes that need to take place to bring the city to net zero, or to e xpect the city to fund it all.
We are ambitious and committed to act, because it is the right thing for the people and future of the city, but we are clear that Sheffield City Council is not in a position to 
finance everything that is needed, does not have the powers that are needed and does not have the responsibility to do everyt hing that is needed within the city.
We are clear that Government will need to play its part in enabling finance, empowering local authorities and intervening in markets that currently do not work as they need 
tomeet this challenge. We will need Government to recognise and actively support the ambition and potential that cities have to move ahead of government timescales.
We will work with the South Yorkshire Mayoral Combined Authority, our fellow local authorities in Yorkshire and the Humber an d other Core Cities to encourage ambitious and 
coordinated action at the right level and increase the potential for attracting the interest of investors.
Page 21Ten areas for action 
1.We will put climate at the centre of our decision -making
2.We will be proactive in finding ways to resource the action 
that is needed
3.We will take action to reduce carbon now
4.We will work towards reducing Council emissions to net 
zero by 2030
5.We will work to bring the city together to make the 
changes we need6.We will work with the city to develop delivery plans for the 
areas where change needs to happen
7.We will work with and support people, businesses and 
organisations to take the action that is needed 
8.We will work to build the skills and economy we need for 
the future
9.Wewill work to ensure we have the planning and 
infrastructure we need for the future
10.We will prepare the city to adapt for a changing climateThe framework includes 10 key commitments for action which we will focus on in the short term. Under each commitment there ar e a
number of priority actions. 
Page 22Our principles for acting
A just and fair transition
We do not all contribute equally to 
climate change and we will not all be 
impacted equally by its effects. The 
action that we need to take will not 
always be easy and we will not let those 
least able to respond be left behind.
We must do everything that we can to 
ensure that the actions that we take 
consider inequalities and have a positive 
rather than negative impact on those 
who are already disadvantaged.Focused on impact
The Council has a wide range of 
responsibilities and limited resources. We 
will need to be pragmatic and prioritise 
the actions that we take to maximise the 
value and impact that we can have.
We will use evidence based interventions 
and focus our work on the areas where 
we can have the most impact.Collaborative
The city and its people are central to our 
success. We know that to succeed we 
have to bring the city with us, and that 
we cannot make the changes that are 
needed alone.
We will work with the city’s people and 
organisations, both to ensure that the 
action that we take is designed to 
maximise success and to enable others 
to act. We will also work with regional 
partners and governmentCreating resilience
Climate change and the changing 
economy will impact on all of us, from the 
weather we experience every day to the 
jobs that are available for us to work in.
We will look to act in a way that reduces 
the impact of climate change and also 
increases our resilience and helps us to 
adapt and thrive in the circumstances 
that we find ourselves .
Positive benefits
We will design interventions that allow us 
to have not only a significant positive 
impact on reducing our carbon 
emissions, but also have other positive 
impacts.
This will require us to work across our 
organisation and with partners, to think 
strategically and long term. It may mean 
that action is sometimes slower but we 
will work to achieve a balance.Long term
The climate emergency can be hard to 
respond to because the payback from 
our actions is not always immediate, and 
there are crises thatimpact on us now.
We will look to the long term where 
appropriate when we take our decisions, 
considering the future cost and 
implications of our decisions and take our 
role of stewardship seriously.Innovative and creative
We are faced with the most ambitious 
task of our lifetimes, with great 
uncertainty and with monumental 
challenges. The behaviours, 
organisations and technologies that we 
are used to are not designed for the 
future that we need to make.
To succeed and to create 
opportunities to make our mark on the 
future, we will need to learn and 
experiment.Nature focused
We are not only in a climate emergency, 
but an ecological and nature crisis. The 
two crises are interrelated and the 
solutions for each can benefit the other. 
Nature is also vital for our wellbeing.
We will seek to act in ways which 
maximise our emissions reductions and 
addresses the nature emergency and 
uses nature based solutions.
Page 23Electric vans trials
Our hugely popular electric van 
trial scheme uses behavioural 
change insights to tackle one of 
the key barriers in switching to 
electric vehicles: uncertainty about 
new technologies and benefits.The story so far
The action that we take must build on the progress that we have made 
already over the years. Whilst there is a long path ahead, we are not starting from a blank 
sheet. It is important to recognise what has already been achieved. Built environment, 
housing and infrastructure projects that cost many millions of pounds and include complex 
technical expertise and challenges, can often take years of planning and complex 
negotiations to deliver. Work being delivered today is usually the result of consistent effort. 
And Sheffield has a history of innovative and forward thinking work on environmental issues 
which stands us in good stead to scale up our ambition, from being the first city in the 
country to implement the Clean Air Act to our award -winning sustainable urban drainage 
scheme.
The Green Commission brought together representatives and experts from organisations 
across the city, resulting in the Green City Strategy, and the Green City Partnership Board. 
Our story so far includes innovations such as:
Grey to Green
Our internationally acclaimed Grey to 
Green scheme, now on its third 
phase, has vastly improved the 
experience of walkers and cyclists, as 
well as businesses and residents in 
the areas around Kelham and 
Riverside and provides sustainable 
urban drainage as well as flood 
resistant planting for biodiversity.
Heart of the City 
Ensuring viability of 
developments is an ongoing 
challenge in a city where prices 
of property and office space are 
relatively low in comparison with 
many places in the UK, but the 
Heart of the City development 
has high environmental 
standards and includes a 
landmark net zero ready office 
building.
Ann’s Grove Primary School
The environmentally innovative school 
commissioned in 2003 included insulation 
made of recycled denim and maximised the 
use of timber and natural light and 
ventilation.
District Heating Network
Sheffield was one of the first places in the UK to 
build a district heating network in the 1980s, and 
has supplied heat to over 2,800 homes and 140 
public and private buildings. Its expansion will be 
a key part of our decarbonisation.
Page 24Maximising the benefits for Sheffield
The challenge is huge, but there are also benefits and opportunities that 
will come from the action we take as we transition to a net zero council, economy and 
society. We will focus our efforts on those interventions that will improve our people’s 
wellbeing, including through building an inclusive and sustainable economy.
Communities and neighbourhoods
•Projects thatincrease community pride, connection and wealth building.
•Supporting the creation, protection, enhancement and accessibility of sustainable 
green infrastructure toprovide a natural environment for people to enjoy and 
contribute towards their health and wellbeing. 
•High quality retrofit schemes thatregenerate communities and improve wellbeing and 
sense of pride for residents.
•Neighbourhoods and communities which make it easier for people to walk and cycle, 
reducing crime and increasing a sense of community.
Education, health and care
•By decarbonising our transport and industry we can improve air quality and so 
improve health and reduce the number of deaths associated with poor air quality.
•Increased numbers of  people to travel by walking and cycling (including increasing 
access to electric bikes to tackle our hills and make cycling an option for more 
people) increases fitness and health for our people. 
•By acting we can reduce biodiversity loss and help mitigate the consequences of 
food shortages and the impacts this will have on our health and food security.
•By taking action to mitigate and adapt to climate change we will reduce the risk of 
harm to people e.g. from extreme weather such as flooding and heatwaves.Economy and development
•By creating a more sustainable economy we will support our city and its businesses 
to thrive in the world that we find ourselves in. Sheffield changed the face of the world 
in the industrial revolution, and we can do that again, accelerating the business and 
economic opportunities that will arise from the move towards a low carbon future, 
including renewable energy, sustainable transport, smart technologies, research and 
development. Sheffield and the surrounding region are perfectly positioned to thrive, 
and to create thousands of new jobs. We must work together across the public and 
private sectors and across geographies to seize this opportunity.
•Businesses can often reduce costs by improving their energy efficiency, and by 
reducing the impacts of climate change, we can help minimise impacts on our local 
economy including reduced worker productivity or service demand.
•By supporting the valuable contribution that the natural environment makes we will 
help our local economy ,particularly the rural, leisure and tourism sectors. We can 
protect the natural environment that is crucial to us as The Outdoor City.
•By making it easier for people to improve and futureproof their homes, we can help 
people to maintain or increase the value of their homes.
•Community energy creates the potential for community wealth building.
Our Council
•The actions that we take to reduce our climate emissions such as having safe warm 
and beautiful homes, can support us to achieve our other strategic outcomes.
•Investing in renewable energy and energy efficiency, particularly in combination with 
accessing government funding, can provide energy efficiency savings and revenue in 
the short and long term .
Page 25The Plan
A framework for climate action, and our next 
steps
Page 261 We will put climate at the centre of our decision -making
Whilst there are clear actions and investments that we need to take to 
reduce our emissions and those of the city, the majority of our decisions 
and the money we spend has other aims and purposes. At the same time 
as delivering our statutory functions, delivering services for Sheffield and 
commissioning, we have the potential to impact on our carbon emissions 
and on nature and biodiversity, either positively or negatively.
Internally within the local authority we need to ensure that the funding that 
is available to us works as hard as it can to reduce our emissions as well 
as allowing us to continue to fulfil our statutory obligations by making 
sound and informed decisions and using priority -based budgeting. We will 
ensure that the money we spend on products and services has a positive 
impact by looking to make sustainable choices. 
We will focus our effort where we can have the greatest impact, on our 
largest contracts where we have the potential to influence supply chains 
significantly, and on those with the highest carbon footprint.
We have already: 
•Included climate impact questions in our decision -making paperwork 
and processes, including our Capital decision -making.
•Provided climate awareness training to over half our elected 
members (ranging between two hours and a full day of training).
•Trained the most senior levels of officers in climate awareness and 
action.1. Investing in our climate education and training
•Training our remaining elected members in climate awareness, 
in particular ensuring that committee members have the 
appropriate climate training for their committee responsibilities.
•Developing and delivering a training programme for officers.
2. Making climate aware decisions
•Raise colleagues’ awareness of climate issues so there is 
shared ownership of the challenge when commissioning or 
procuring goods, works and services.
•Ensure that new Governance arrangements incorporate 
climate effectively.
•Design and implement effective climate assessment tools and 
embed throughout decision making and scrutiny processes.
3. Making climate action everybody’s business
•Include climate action in service planning.
•Monitor all services on the progress that they make.
4. Improving our data
•Understand where our data is lacking and take action to 
improve it.
•Report our Carbon Emissions as an organisation and a city 
annually.
Page 272 We will be proactive in finding ways to resource the action that is needed
The full scale of up front investment that is needed to fund the 
transformation required across the city is vast and difficult to fully quantify, but well into 
the billions. It falls at a time when the local authority, business and individual households 
face unprecedented financial challenges.
A conservative cost estimate to decarbonise housing in the city alone is £2 -£5bn, costs 
which would significantly increase rents for tenants, or council tax if the council were to 
finance this in its entirety. Current government funding and policy mandates high 
numbers of new homes, rather than retrofitting existing stock, which presents a 
significant challenge. The cost for decarbonising the Council’s non -domestic buildings is 
estimated to be at least £19m. These investments will increase energy efficiency 
andgenerate some income over time (estimated cost savings of £5.1 by 2030), but w e 
are clear that these arenot costs that the council or city can currently afford at a time 
when we cannot afford to bring our buildings up to safe and lawful standards.
But the status quo is not an option. The world, country and the economy are changing, 
and Sheffield must change too. All cities and local authorities face similar challenges to 
resourcing this challenge, which is particularly acute for areas like Sheffield that are 
seeking to move ahead of the government’s 2050 target. National change is required to 
provide financial models that make mass retrofit affordable for home and property 
owners and landlords, as well as public sector organisations.
The financial and behavioural legacy of Covid is uncertain but likely to be significant and 
ongoing, requiring additional investment to support public transport in particular due to 
the exacerbation of long term decline in patronage.
We know that the cost of inaction or delay islikely to exceed the cost of early action, but 
we need to be creative and innovative as a city to find the funds that are needed. We 
also need to ensure that the gap between what we need to do and what we can afford 
to do or are allowed to is brought to the attention of Government, and we are working to 
do this with other cities in the Core Cities group.1. We will have projects ready for investment
•Identify funding, invest in feasibility studies and develop outline 
business cases so that we are ready to respond to funding 
opportunities as they arise.
•Work creatively to package up ‘investible propositions’ and partner with 
other places and cities to access investment from both public and 
private sector. 
2. Prioritising climate action in our budgeting
•Our budget setting process and Medium -Term Financial Strategy will 
take account of its climate impact (and consider appropriate mitigation 
measures).
•Work on our Investment Strategy will help us to prioritise and to identify 
funding and investment routes for our decarbonisation programme.
3. Apply for available government funding
•Continue to s ubmit proposals to future funding rounds to support the 
decarbonisation of our fleet and estate, including Local Authority 
Delivery –Housing retrofit and Public Sector Decarbonisation 
Schemes.
4. Be creative and ambitious in our approach to investment
•Develop a robust understanding of innovative financing options, 
including exploring options for investors supportive of longer term 
returns on investment such as pension funds.
•Pilot multi -intervention, place -based Net Zero delivery models.
•Develop project proposals for national and regional funding 
opportunities which are aligned to our ambitions on climate change 
and to create a sustainable economy fit for the future.
Page 28We need to plan for the future so that our decisions are strategic 
and allow us to maximise our carbon reduction, but are also taking action 
immediately and taking advantage of opportunities as they arise.
We have already shared that we are applying for government and regional funding 
opportunities as they arise, and turning these into action. We will, however, take a 
considered approach to applying for funds.
Some of the a ction that we are already taking across the Council that is reducing 
our carbon emissions immediately in our priority thematic areas includes:
Our homes and buildings
•We have bid this year for over £12m of funding to improve the energy efficiency 
of our homes and buildings, receiving almost £5m so far, with further decisions 
awaited.
•We are retrofitting approximately 800 homes through the government’s Local 
Area Delivery fund and are bidding for future rounds of funding, delivering 
improvements to the homes of council tenants and people living on low 
incomes.
•We are carrying out work which will allow more private sector home owners, 
particularly those on low incomes, to benefit from ECO funding provided by 
private sector energy providers.
•We have se cured funding for roofing works on 20 high rise buildings, which will 
include solar PV installation and battery storage to ensure generated power 
can meet periods of highest demand.
•We are delivering energy improvements to several Council non -domestic 
buildings over 2021/22.3 We will take action to reduce carbon now
The way we travel
•We have agreed a Clean Air Zone which will lever in investment for decarbonisation of 
affected vehicles.
•We have installed 20rapid charge electric vehicle charging points in the past year, with 
a further 7 forthcoming imminently.
•We are running electric van and taxi trials to allow businesses, organisations and taxi 
drivers to trial electric vehicles risk free.
•We are consulting on three Active Travel Fund projects to improve cycling routes and 
reduce traffic in local neighbourhoods by 2022 and delivering a city centre bike hub.
•We are p roviding a salary sacrifice scheme for employee electric vehicles and will 
proactively promote this and the bike and ebike salary sacrifice schemes .
•To decarbonise the council’s travel, we have invested in 62 electric and ultra low 
emission vehicles, and are in the middle of a six year vehicle replacement strategy 
initially aimed at clean air compliance and prioritising electric vehicles. This will be 
reviewed annually.
Nature based solutions and the nature emergency
•We will continue to manage our trees and woodlands to protect the 22kt CO2 per year 
carbon sequestration they provide .
•We have increased the amount of land that is managed naturalistically , and are 
increasing this further.
•We are committed to planting 100,000 trees on our land over the next ten years, and 
are on target to plant almost 14,000 trees this year with schools and community 
groups.
Skills and economy for the future
•We are delivering a £2.3m project to support SMEs across South Yorkshire to audit 
their energy efficiency and provide grants to reduce their emissions, saving 
approximately 830 tonnes of CO2.
Page 294 We will work towards reducing Council emissions to net zero by 2030
As a Council, we have made great progress in recent years with the condition 
and energy efficiency of our homes. A high proportion of our Council homes are 
already at EPC C (which is the usual level at which government funding for 
energy interventions currently stops). But we know this will not be enough to 
deliver the emissions reductions we need, or to protect our tenants from 
increasing fuel bills or the changing climate.
We have already outlined the condition and financial challenge posed by our 
estate, and those present a huge challenge to our ambitions.
We are one of the largest employers in the city, with over 8,400 employees. We 
have approximately 1,145 vehicles in our fleet, including those operated by our 
two principal contractors, Amey and Veolia. An employee survey in 2019 found 
that 29% of employees reported using their own vehicles as part of their job and 
an additional 32.4% use their car to travel to and from work.
As a large, committed, organisation, we have the potential to make a significant 
dent in the city’s emissions, to inspire others to act and to stimulate demand, 
and so increase skills and capacity in local markets.
We will develop comprehensive routemaps to support our ambition to 
decarbonise the local authority by 2030 and will actively seek out funding, and 
will prioritise the following actions:
1.Decarbonising our homes
•We have commissioned work to identify technical solutions for decarbonising 
our housing stock.
•Further decarbonise our housing stock, through building fabric improvements, 
removing fossil fuels by connecting to district heating schemes where possible 
or switching to heat pumps and installing rooftop solar PV.2. Using our land and assets to further our ambitions
•Agree a Corporate Asset Management Plan and Strategic Land and Asset 
Plan and rationalise the Council’s estate to enable investment. This includes 
how best to dispose of buildings which are in the worst condition.
•Continue to identify our worst energy performing buildings and prioritise those 
for future energy efficiency and low carbon initiatives as funding becomes 
available, including seeking alternative financing arrangements where existing 
funding streams are not sufficient.
•Work with Local Area Committees to review mowing and hedge cutting 
regimes, seeking opportunities to increase biodiversity and potentially reduce 
emissions.
•Assess the potential to increase the number of trees planted on council land.
•Identify opportunities for solar PV retrofit on our buildings and homes and 
renewable energy generation and storage on our land.
•Extend the district heat networks to provide heat to council buildings and 
homes.
3. Decarbonising our fleet
•Reduce fleet mileage through driver behaviour training, optimising route 
planning and journey consolidation.
•Switch cars and vans to electric vehicles through fleet replacement 
programmes.
4. Our role as an employer
•We will work to ensure that our electric vehicle salary sacrifice scheme is 
coordinated with other interventions to maximise its impact.
•We will understand the skills needed for our organisation.
Page 305 We will work to bring the city together to make the changes we need
As a city, we have people and organisations with a wealth of skills, 
knowledge, experience and passion foracting on climate change, 
as well as many people and businesses who want to act but may 
not have the skills or confidence. As a city council too, we have a 
lot to learn and a long way to go to achieve our ambitions.
There is so much to be done for Sheffield to transition to a thriving 
and net zero city, that the Council cannot do all that needs to be 
done. We hope that not only will people and businesses act to 
reduce their own emissions, but that we can come together as a 
city to help and support each other to do more than each of us 
could alone.
We have already held an initial climate summit in March 2021 
attended by over 200 people whose input has informed this plan, 
and worked with the Green City Partnership Board to develop the 
draft Local Plan and inform other policy. We now want to involve 
more people and our organisations as we develop our delivery 
plans and interventions, and to enable, support and celebrate 
others to act together.1. Create a panel of advisors to help us develop our plans and 
interventions
•Set up a panel of independent experts to give professionals, 
researchers and people and businesses who are already leading 
the way in reducing their emissions the opportunity to help us to 
develop policy and interventions that work for Sheffield and for the 
planet.
2. Encourage action and collaboration to allow action at scale
•Support children and young people to be part of developing our 
plans and taking action through our youth engagement and voice 
services.
•Work with our businesses and organisations to develop and deliver 
action and innovation through a partnership approach to working 
that is focused on action, working with existing networks and 
supporting the creation of new partnerships.
•Hold at least an annual event bringing people and organisations 
together to monitor our progress as a City and identify new action.
3. Create ways for people and businesses to invest in our future 
and create community wealth
•Explore the potential for crowdsourcing of projects and increase 
the amount of community owned energy generated in the city.
Page 316 We will work with the city to develop delivery plans for the areas where change needs to happen
We need to take action now, but we also 
need ambitious, longer term plans. We will develop iterative, agile 
plans over the next 18 months, working across the Council and 
with organisations and individuals across the city to develop 
plans that will build on the Pathways to Decarbonisation work 
and identify the ways forward.
Given current resource and demand, developing plans for all 
areas at the same time will result in slower action across the 
board. We will initially prioritise the sectors where Council action 
can lead to the biggest impact and delay will be most detrimental 
due to locked in emissions or accessing funding.
•Decarbonising the council’s fleet and estate.
•Domestic retrofit, buildings.
•How we travel, including decarbonising our vehicles and 
increasing the use of public and active travel.
•Decarbonising our businesses.
•Energy generation, storage and network capacity.
The way that we use our land, including carbon sequestration 
and nature based solutions to our changing climate is important, 
particularly given our proud status as The Outdoor City. Our 
Local Nature Recovery Strategy and response to the biological 
and nature emergency will incorporate our approach to using our 
land for carbon sequestration.We have a section in this plan which identifies some of our next 
steps on creating skills and economy for the future. This is a key 
challenge for Sheffield and the South Yorkshire region, and for 
the country as a whole. We will need to work closely with national 
government, the South Yorkshire Mayoral Combined Authority 
and with local partners to ensure that the county is positioned to 
gain the skills that are needed.
Remaining areas of emissions, where the Council has less 
influence, where there are existing actors in the Council leading 
in the field or where national policy direction means that acting 
sooner would reduce access to much needed and imminent 
funding, will be given greater focus once earlier plans are 
developed and action is underway. This includes delivery plans 
on what we eat, buy and throw away. 
This does not mean that we will disengage on other topics: work 
that is already taking place will continue where it is a priority for 
portfolios, we will provide information on action that can be taken 
by individuals and organisations, continue to seize funding 
opportunities as they arise and where resources allow, and 
encourage and provide support to external organisations acting 
to achieve change.
Page 32This plan focuses on the actions that the Council will take, but if 
the emissions of the city are to reduce, people and businesses will need to act 
as well. We know from our climate summit and from conversations with people, 
businesses and other organisations working on climate change that people 
and businesses in Sheffield  have different understandings of climate change. 
Whilst most people are increasingly concerned about climate change and want 
to act, they often don’t know how or are concerned about the implications or 
costs of the changes that need to be made. 
We need to work with our people and communities so that they understand 
what can and needs to be done. We need to understand their concerns and 
the barriers to them acting, so that the action we take makes it as easy as 
possible for people and businesses to do the right thing. 
We will learn from our public health success in working and communicating 
with communities during Covid, and use the networks and techniques that we 
have developed to reach people in their communities.
The transition to a net zero carbon city needs to be a just transition. It is 
important that the people who are least well off, and who already contribute 
least to our emissions, can make the changes to their homes and transport 
that will both reduce their emissions and improve their health and wellbeing. At 
the same time, we need to enable and encourage those people who are most 
able to make changes to their homes and lifestyles to make those changes.
Businesses contribute around a third of the city’s direct emissions, and access 
to finance and consumer demand is increasingly dependent on businesses 
improving their sustainability. Reducing energy consumption and waste also 
often reduces costs for businesses.
Our delivery plans will all include actions to support and enable people and 
businesses to take the action that is needed, but whilst these are being 
developed, we commit to delivering the following actions:7 We will work with and support people, businesses and organisations to take the action that is needed 
1. Understanding the motivations and barriers facing people and businesses
• We will work with Local Area Committees, people and businesses and use the 
information that we gather to inform and shape our services and interventions.
2. Providing information and inspiration 
•We will improve the information and signposting that we make available to 
people and businesses to information through our website, social media and 
services.
•We will showcase the progress that businesses and individuals are already 
making to inspire action.
•We will provide business advisers and other key officers with relevant climate 
awareness training.
3. Maximising the funding available to businesses and individuals in the city
•We will lever in funding to support projects, such as the £2.3m ERDF Low 
Carbon Business Support project which provides free audits and grants for 
SMEs across South Yorkshire and the £3m Local Area Delivery Funding which 
allows us to directly deliver energy improvements to the housing of people on 
low incomes.
•We will publicise government and other funding opportunities to maximise take -
up.
4. Finding ways to make it easier for people to take the action that is needed
•We will continue to deliver our highly successful electric van trial, roll out an 
electric taxi trial and explore the potential for other similar interventions that 
reduce risk and increase confidence to act.
•We will explore options to fast track planning applications for developments with 
the highest energy efficiency standards and other incentives to make it easier to 
do the right thing.
Page 33The transition to a net zero future provides an opportunity for us 
to create an economy which is fairer and more sustainable. We already have a 
high level of “green jobs” in the city, and innovative businesses at the leading 
edge of the technology needed to create a sustainable economy for Britain, 
and this presents an opportunity.
It also presents us with a challenge to plan ahead, and to work with schools, 
employers and skills providers so that our businesses and people can adapt 
and thrive in a fast -changing world where some jobs and business models and 
processes will become obsolete within the next decade, whilst others will 
increase in demand. 
It is crucial that young people have the skills and education that they need 
both to be citizens of the future and that careers advice and guidance and 
curricula take into account the changing world and economy.
At the same time, we also need our local businesses, industry and workforce 
to have the skills and capacity required for the scale and pace of change 
needed for us to decarbonise our homes and buildings, and our transport 
systems. 
We need the work that is carried out to be of a high quality and using the most 
modern methods, materials and techniques to the standard that we need to 
prevent problems or the need for further work and cost further down the line. 
Skills funding and the apprenticeship system is not currently designed in a way 
that encourages skills providers or employers to invest in skills that will be 
needed at scale in the near future rather than for getting people into work now. 
Giving employers and skills providers the reassurance that demand is not only 
coming but already here, stimulating demand further and matching it with 
growing capacity in skills and supply chains will be an ongoing challenge.8 We will work to build the skills and economy we need for the future
1. Stimulating and celebrating Sheffield’s low carbon 
economy
•Ensure that we understand the potential for green job creation and jobs at 
risk in Sheffield, as well as the skills gap in provision of carbon reduction 
products and services in the City.
•Increase awareness of the increasingly high levels of demand for retrofit 
services to increase interest in skills development and provision, as well 
as further stimulating demand.
2.  Building skills to deliver the transition
•Work with the South Yorkshire Mayoral Combined Authority, businesses 
and industry to increase the provision of low carbon skills.
•Explore how we can w ork with the existing green sector and training 
providers to increase and expand relevant skills.
•Use our procurement of carbon reduction and wider activity to support 
the development of low carbon skills and economy locally.
3. Educating children, young people and communities 
•The Education Service are working with Learn Sheffield, schools and 
other private and community sector partners to develop an offer for young 
people ’s climate education.
Page 349 We will work to ensure we have the planning and infrastructure we need for the future
The infrastructure that underpins how our city works will be 
vital to our success, from the layout of roads and cycle paths and the 
capability of our electrical infrastructure, to the way we design our city, and 
including the digital infrastructure that will allow many people to work 
remotely and travel less.
Sheffield is at a pivotal point as we develop our new local plan which will be 
central to planning policy for 20years once it comes into force. It is crucial to 
make the plan as ambitious as it can be, and that it is futureproofed.
Sheffield introduced one of the first district energy networks in the country 
over 25 years ago, fuelled by the city’s residual waste . More recently, district 
heating is increasingly recognised as having the potential to play a large part 
in the decarbonisation of the city’s heating, and there is the potential to 
explore new and innovative ways to source its energy, its expansion to serve 
an increased number of both residential and commercial properties, and 
work is underway to explore options for investment to secure its future.
As heating and transport is increasingly electrified, and increasing levels of 
renewable energy are fed into the grid, the electrical infrastructure which we 
take for granted will have to cope with levels and variability of demand and 
supply that it was not designed to manage. The electricity grid system in 
Sheffield, as elsewhere, will need to be fit for the future and we have a role to 
work with Northern Power Grid to influence this.1. Using the planning system to support our ambitions
• Develop a new Local Plan that is future -proofed and supports our 
ambitions to transition to a zero carbon economy by 2030.
• Explore what sustainable neighbourhoods might look like.
• Develop and apply interim revised supplementary planning guidance on 
renewable and low carbon energy to apply before the Local Plan is 
adopted.
• Explore the potential for a compulsory carbon offsetting scheme in 
circumstances when on site abatement is not possible.
2. Ensuring our energy infrastructure is fit for purpose
• Work with partners to explore opportunities for the expansion and 
decarbonisation of existing heat networks, including through the 
identification of heat network zones.
• Continue work to explore options for investment in the District Energy 
Network.
• Continue to work with Northern Power Grid to ensure that Sheffield’s 
electricity infrastructure is capable of supporting our net zero goals and 
to ensure that investment is made to enable this. 
• Work with Cadent to explore opportunities todecarbonise the gas grid.
3. Investing in our transport infrastructure
• We are delivering a £50+ million programme of active travel and public 
transport improvements across the city through our Transforming Cities 
Funding, to enable people to get around the city using low carbon, 
sustainable and inclusive ways of travelling.
Page 3510 We will prepare the city to adapt for a changing 
climate
We know that even our best efforts in Sheffield and globally can 
only limit climate change. Whilst every fraction of a degree temperature 
increase that can be avoided matters, we also need to prepare our city for a 
changing climate. Increasing extreme weather events will become increasingly 
common, particularly flooding, extreme heat and wild fire. These will impact on 
people’s health and wellbeing and way of life, on service demands and on our 
economy.
We will need to have a full understanding of which areas are at risk so that we 
can plan appropriately. Buildings for the future will need to increasingly 
incorporate features such as green walls, green roofs and, in flood prone 
areas, buildings that are raised off the ground to withstand flooding. We 
already have examples of all these interventions, and Sheffield has been at the 
forefront of green roof development in the UK.
Through the City’s Flood Programme we have invested more than £25m in 
flood risk reduction since the devastating floods of 2007 directly protecting 
over 500 businesses and approx. 350 homes. £15m of schemes are now in 
delivery and development to protect a further 100 homes and over 150 more 
businesses. Between now and 2027 more than £50m of further investment is 
planned across the Sheaf, Porter and Blackburn Brook to protect 750 homes 
and over 500 businesses.
We already focus a lot of our resilience work on nature -based solutions to 
flood prevention, including our internationally acclaimed Grey to Green 
programme of Sustainable Urban Drainage interventions, moorland 
restoration and natural flood management. We are looking at ways of working 
with partners and landowners to expand this work using learning from current 
projects such as our trial of natural flood management approaches in the Limb 
Brook Valley with Sheffield and Rotherham Wildlife.1.Develop our understanding of the impacts of 
climate change on our city, and on the people who live 
and work here.
•Commission work to increase our understanding of the 
impact of climate change on Sheffield’s residents in the 
coming years.
2. Create a resilience plan for the city
•Work with city partners to develop a plan setting out how we 
canwork together to thrive in a changing climate. This will 
include forward planning, preparing our people and 
businesses and emergency planning.
3. Future -proofing our city
•Use the opportunity of the development of the Local Plan to 
futureproof our planning framework.
•Invest in flood risk reduction measures to 
better protect existing property and infrastructure and 
toenable resilient investment.
•Identify and look for funding to deliver interventions to 
mitigate the impacts of climate change.
4. Supporting our people and businesses to adapt
•Our Flood Programme includes providing flood resilience 
guidance for people and businesses.
Page 36Page 37This page is intentionally left blank
Page 38