Climate  Emergency   
STRATEGY   
 
www.southglos.gov.uk
CLIMATE EMERGENCY STRATEGY
www.southglos.gov.uk /climatechange2Contents
Introduction  ..................................................................................................................................... 3
What is the Climate Emergency?  ................................................................................................ 4
Global impacts  ................................................................................................................................ 5
Local impacts  ................................................................................................................................. 5
Reducing our carbon emissions  .................................................................................................. 6
Getting ready for the local impacts of climate change  .......................................................... 7
Taking action  ................................................................................................................................... 8
The natural environment  .............................................................................................................. 9
Targets and monitoring  .............................................................................................................. 10
Challenges and opportunities in South Gloucestershire  .................................................... 11
Climate Emergency action plans  ............................................................................................ 13
Climate change and equalities  .................................................................................................. 19
Monitoring and review  ............................................................................................................... 21
Creating change nationally, regionally and through local policy  ....................................... 22
Delivery  ......................................................................................................................................... 24
Appendix 1:  South Gloucestershire Council to declare a Climate Emergency  ............. 25
Appendix 2: Climate Emergency Action Plan – funded projects  .................................... 27
Appendix 3:  Climate Emergency Action Plan – Year 1 (2020/21)  .................................. 37CLIMATE EMERGENCY STRATEGY
The Climate 
Emergency 
declaration was 
a cross-party 
decisionIntroduction
 yThis is the South Gloucestershire Climate Emergency Strategy document. It has a 10 
year lifespan 2020-2030. 
 yIt provides an introduction to our annual Climate Emergency Action Plans 2020-2030. 
It explains the Council’s principles and general approach to delivering the aim of South 
Gloucestershire being carbon neutral by 2030. 
 yThis document is jointly owned by South Gloucestershire Local Strategic Partnership 
and South Gloucestershire Council.
 yThis document sits under the South Gloucestershire Sustainable Community Strategy.
Climate Emergency declaration:
In July 2019, South Gloucestershire Council declared a Climate Emergency pledging  
to provide the leadership to enable South Gloucestershire to become carbon neutral  
by 2030. 
In addition the council joined a group of forward thinking local authorities and signed 
up to the UK100 pledge to enable our communities to achieve 100% renewable energy 
across all sectors. The revised UK100 pledge (signed November 2020) commits to net 
zero council emissions by 2030 and net zero area-wide emissions by 2045.
Read the declaration at: www.southglos.gov.uk/climatechange
To deliver these pledges our aims are: 
1. For South Gloucestershire to become carbon neutral by 2030,
2.  To maximise the generation of renewable energy from installations located  
within South Gloucestershire,
3.  To ensure South Gloucestershire is prepared for the local impacts of a 
changing climate,
4.  To ensure that nature in our local area is more protected, connected and 
healthy and that biodiversity is increased,
5. To plant trees across South Gloucestershire by 2030 to double tree canopy cover.
www.southglos.gov.uk /climatechange
3CLIMATE EMERGENCY STRATEGY
www.southglos.gov.uk /climatechange4Our Vision is for a climate resilient South 
Gloucestershire with a thriving low carbon economy and lifestyle reflected in our 
travel, homes, businesses and communities, where nature can flourish.
What is the Climate Emergency?
Average global temperatures have now increased by 1°C above  
pre-industrial levels and the cause is human made through the burning 
of fossil fuels. The amount of global heating which takes place now and 
in the future depends on the total quantity of greenhouse gas pollution, 
which includes carbon dioxide, in the atmosphere. 
In 2015 global leaders met in Paris to agree to avoid dangerous climate 
change by limiting global heating to well below 2 degrees C and to pursue 
efforts to limit it to 1.5 degrees C. The UK government signed the Paris 
Agreement committing to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. 
The world is now on track to overshoot the 1.5°C limit before the  
year 2050 – the outcome of which would be severe and not possible  
to reverse. 
2000
1950
1900
18505
CLIMATE EMERGENCY STRATEGY
www.southglos.gov.uk /climatechangeGlobal impacts
The chart below shows the impact of different levels of warming. Changes in the average 
global temperature may appear small but produce very large impacts in the natural world and 
physical systems including the weather and sea-levels. 
Local impacts 
Currently flooding is identified as the number 1 risk to the UK from climate breakdown. 
There has already been a clear increase in the number of flooding events and the scale of 
the impact they have had. Locally, flooding in the Winter of 2020, had a severe impact in the 
Gloucestershire and Tewksbury area as shown in the photo below. •   The impact of average 
warming of   
2 degrees C  is much 
greater than average 
warming of  
1.5 degrees C .
•   2 degrees C  
warming would lead to 
severe consequences 
for humans and all life 
on earth. 
•   Many people would be 
forced to leave their 
homes due to flooding, 
droughts and famine.
8% 
of plants will lose 
1/2 their habitable 
area
6% 
of insects will  
lose 1/2 their 
habitable area
14% 
of the global 
population exposed 
to severe heat  
every 1 in 5 years37% 
of the global 
population exposed 
to severe heat  
every 1 in 5 years70% 
to
90%
At least once
every 10 
years18% 
of insects will  
lose 1/2 their 
habitable area
99% 16% 
of plants will lose 
1/2 their habitable 
area2x 
Worse
3x 
Worse
Up to 
29%
worse
2.6x
worse
10x
worse
Loss of  
plant species
Loss of  
insect species
Further decline 
in coral reefs
Extreme heat
Sea-ice-free 
summers in  
the Arctic1.5ͦ C CC 2ͦ CIMPACT  of 2ͦ C 
compared to 1.5ͦ C 
>>
>
>
>At least once
every 100  
yearsCLIMATE EMERGENCY STRATEGY
www.southglos.gov.uk /climatechange6Reducing our carbon emissions
We need to look at the sources of greenhouse gas pollution and take the necessary steps to reduce 
these to the lowest possible level and offset any remaining emissions. More broadly speaking and 
on a global scale, our carbon emissions impact comes from what we buy and the services we use, 
and what we invest in. We therefore need to tackle all of these sources of emissions. 
Locally our carbon emissions are mainly generated from homes, transport and industry. To 
make our contribution to limiting the average rise in global temperature to 1.5 degrees C we 
need to change the way we heat and power our homes, move people and goods, and provide 
manufacturing and services so that doing these no-longer emits the greenhouse gas pollution 
that is increasing global heating. 
Reducing our carbon emissions will involve:
 ySwitching journeys under five miles to bike, public transport and walking,
 yReducing our mileage in all vehicles,
 ySwitching from diesel and petrol vehicles to electric vehicles for journeys that can’t be 
made on foot, by bike or public transport, 
 yChanging the way we heat and power our homes and replacing gas and oil boilers with 
heat pumps or heat supplied from a low carbon heat network, 
 yChanging the way we heat and power our businesses by switching to renewable heat and 
using roofs to generate electricity using photovoltaic (PV) panels,
 yChanging the way we locate and access services,
 yBuying less, 
 yMaking all new developments zero carbon and locating them in low impact locations,
 yInvesting in the green economy by for example retrofitting buildings for high energy 
efficiency standards and increasing renewable energy. 
7
CLIMATE EMERGENCY STRATEGY
www.southglos.gov.uk /climatechangeGetting ready for the local impacts of 
climate change
 Locally climate change is likely to have big impacts on the amount of rain and extreme heat we 
experience such as the temperatures experienced in the UK during the summer of 2018. These 
extreme weather events are likely to happen at least every other year by 2040 if temperatures 
continue to rise at current rates, for example May 2020 tied with May 2016 as being the 
hottest May ever recorded globally in human history. As temperatures increase in the UK there 
are likely to be more incidents of regular flooding of homes and businesses and disruption of 
local services. Furthermore, it may impact on our health, the food available for us to eat and 
our water supply. Globally huge numbers of people will be forced to leave their homes due to 
flooding, lack of food and water, health risks and political instability as a result of global heating. 
Climate change is one of a number of problems for the natural world and the more extreme 
the effects, the harder it is for nature to recover. We are losing natural habitat and record 
numbers of animal and plant species. We rely on the natural world for our food supply, water, 
raw materials and our wellbeing. We are linked to the natural world and by restoring the natural 
world we restore our own future and all life on earth. 
Building local climate resilience will include:
 yImproving how we work together, involving everyone to enable a zero carbon, nature rich 
and healthier future,
 yReducing flood risk through managing landscapes for example by slowing the rate at 
which rainfall runs from higher ground into streams and rivers, 
 yMaking sure that services are not disrupted during extreme weather events (delivered 
remotely where possible), 
 yDesigning new buildings so they can withstand heatwaves without the need for energy 
intensive air conditioning, and adjusting existing buildings and the way we use them to 
withstand extremes of temperature,
 yBuilding new highways for walking, cycling and vehicles to be designed to withstand 
extreme weather, particularly flooding and heat,
 yPlanting trees and vegetation to provide habitat, summer shading, and to slow down 
heavy rainfall which causes flooding incidents,
 yProtecting, improving, increasing, and joining up areas of woodland, grassland and wetland 
to help nature thrive and withstand new pressures,
 yGrowing food locally,
 yReducing waste and working towards zero waste by 2030,
 yReducing the waste of water,
 yPreparing for new pests and diseases triggered by a hotter climate. CLIMATE EMERGENCY STRATEGY
www.southglos.gov.uk /climatechange8Taking action
 yWe can reduce the negative outcomes of climate change by taking action and changing 
how we live and how our society works, 
 yIt is important to remember that what we do matters, because every extra degree of 
warming matters, 
 yRestoring the health of the local natural environment is an essential part of tackling the 
Climate Emergency. 
Changing the way we live today can 
also provide many benefits to us:
 yImproved health and wellbeing, 
 yStronger local economy,
 yNew employment opportunities in the green 
economy,
 yBetter access to a healthier and wildlife rich natural 
world, 
 yBetter public transport and walking and cycling 
options, 
 yImproved connections between people, businesses and communities, 
 yLess clutter in our lives. 
River Severn – river levels predicted to rise
Sims Hill community  
supported agriculture9
CLIMATE EMERGENCY STRATEGY
www.southglos.gov.uk /climatechange
The natural environment
The council also recognises that along with other factors, climate change is having a seriously 
negative impact on the health of nature and that there is an ecological crisis where increasing 
numbers of plants, insects and animals are dying. All life on earth depends on a healthy 
environment and it is also essential to protect and restore nature in its own right. Nature has 
a key role in reducing the negative impacts of climate change and as such, nature recovery is a 
key priority across our Climate Emergency Action Plans.
The council recognises that responding to climate change and supporting nature recovery will 
have real benefits for our communities, residents and businesses in terms of improving our 
environment, creating new jobs, improving our physical and mental health, and strengthening 
our communities. Improved health includes better levels of fitness from people leading more 
active lifestyles and reduced numbers of people experiencing breathing problems due to 
reductions in air pollution from vehicles and industry. Better mental health and wellbeing is a 
proven result of access to a healthy natural local environment for exercise and connection  
with nature. 
Nature recovery includes:
 ySupporting nature by protecting and 
improving local habitat, preventing 
the loss of key wildlife,
 yRestoring landscapes including salt 
marshes, meadows and common 
land,
 yIncreasing the amount of land 
managed to benefit nature and 
biodiversity,
 yLinking areas of woodland, grassland 
and wetland to create nature 
networks which enable nature to 
thrive and withstand other changes,
 yPlanting trees, perennial shrubs and 
flowers which support pollinating 
insects and other wildlife,
 ySupporting communities, business 
and residents to restore nature
 yWorking with farmers to manage land for the benefit of nature,
 yReducing all types of environmental pollution including plastic pollution.
Together we need to: 
 yReduce our carbon emissions as quickly as possible
 yProtect and restore nature, then the natural world can help us
 yGet ready for the local impacts of climate changeBigger, better, more and 
joined up habitat 
Brook Way wildflower vergeCLIMATE EMERGENCY STRATEGY
www.southglos.gov.uk /climatechange10The climate and nature emergency needs you 
To tackle the climate and nature emergency we need everyone to act and that applies in  
South Gloucestershire just as it does across the world.
Aims and monitoring
Through our performance management system we will monitor performance towards the key 
goals in our Climate Emergency declaration:
To provide the leadership to enable South Gloucestershire to become carbon neutral by 2030, 
and to maximise the generation of renewable energy from installations located within South 
Gloucestershire.
Timeline of South Gloucestershire Climate Emergency action
 
The above timeline sets out how the Council has responded to the Climate Emergency over 
the first year following the declaration.
A yearly process
Each year over the 10 years from 2020 to 2030 the council will produce and deliver an annual 
action plan, reporting in December each year on the progress that has been made. Climate 
Emergency 
declared  
(17th July 
2019)Climate 
Emergency 
Task and 
Finish Group 
report 
(January 2020)Climate 
Emergency 
Task and 
Finish Group 
formed  
(July 2019)Cabinet 
Climate 
Emergency 
Year 1 Action 
Plan  
(April 2020)Climate 
Emergency 
Community 
Engagement 
Group formed 
(October 
2019)Year 1 
update report 
and Year 2 
Action Plan 
(December 
2020)
11
CLIMATE EMERGENCY STRATEGY
www.southglos.gov.uk /climatechange
Challenges and opportunities in  
South Gloucestershire 
South Gloucestershire is a rich and varied area in terms of landscape, communities and 
economy. We value our diverse landscape with access to urban centres, historic market towns, 
beautiful countryside and areas of outstanding natural beauty and the extraordinary people 
who live and work here. 
South Gloucestershire has a valued natural environment and we want to keep it that way, 
recognising the importance of maintaining what residents value most, particularly the area’s 
heritage and access to nature rich green spaces. 
Whilst the area in general has been more affluent than many parts of the country, this does 
bring additional carbon emissions challenges. For example the area has a higher than average 
ownership of petrol and diesel cars and therefore reducing mileage and promoting walking, 
cycling and use of public transport is critical. However, this also gives us the opportunity to 
make a really big impact very quickly. 
Although generally more affluent, South Gloucestershire does include areas of deprivation 
and we need to ensure that our Climate Emergency work can help to reduce some of these 
inequalities. Our population is aging and this is relevant to how we respond to the local impacts 
of climate change making and putting in measures to minimise the local impact of climate 
change all the more vital. 
CLIMATE EMERGENCY STRATEGY
www.southglos.gov.uk /climatechange12In an area where we are anticipating a growth in our population as people move into this area, 
we need to meet these housing and transport needs in ways which don’t increase carbon 
emissions in South Gloucestershire. We need to ensure that the additional emissions from 
housing and related transport is low carbon, ready for the local climate future and that any 
residual emissions are offset. Where nature is affected by development we must minimise the 
impact and actively restore nature achieving a net gain in biodiversity. 
We are a population with a history of pioneering new ideas and are home to companies that 
are leaders in the field of innovation, digital engineering, robotics, health care and advanced 
manufacturing. There are many opportunities for us to lead in the growth of the net zero 
carbon economy and our businesses are showing us how they can rise to the challenge of 
climate change. 
A large part of South Gloucestershire is rural and we must strengthen ties between our 
rural and urban areas and communities recognising and unlocking the great potential of our 
agricultural and other land owners to provide local food, more stable local climate and to 
restore nature. 
Nature in our local area is experiencing extreme challenges. For example local trees are being 
damaged and killed by ash die back. This disease is not caused by climate change but climate 
change speeds up the process of tree decay and we must compensate for trees lost at a time 
when we need to plant large numbers of trees to tackle climate change. 
We have a strong and vibrant community and we must harness the power of these existing 
connections, organisations and individuals to champion action for climate and nature 
throughout the area. We need to work with everyone in our community to create a hopeful, 
safer and nature rich prosperous future. 
13
CLIMATE EMERGENCY STRATEGY
www.southglos.gov.uk /climatechangeClimate Emergency action plans 
Our approach 
The South Gloucestershire Climate Emergency 
action plans should be developed with the 
following key principles in mind:
 yGiving equal consideration to carbon 
emissions reduction, preparing for the 
local effects of climate change and 
supporting nature to recover;
 yConsidering climate justice and ensure 
that no-one is left behind; 
 yOptimising health and well-being 
co-benefits, and ensure that health 
inequalities are not widened; 
 yEnsuring that the plan aligns with local efforts to improve air quality;
 yAddressing the ecological emergency and nature recovery, and consider any ecological 
and wildlife implications;
 yTaking account of the value of the natural world in terms of wider co-benefits – social, 
health and environmental value (not just financial); 
 yMaking sure the use of environmental resources is minimised and the most sustainable 
action is taken; and
 yOptimising potential investment and sponsorship opportunities. 
Evidence base
South Gloucestershire carbon emissions 
baseline gap analysis (2019)
This document shows a basic breakdown 
of carbon emissions sources across South 
Gloucestershire and looks in more detail at the 
key areas of carbon emissions from Buildings, 
Transport and Industry and at the council’s 
direct emissions. 
The council’s direct emissions come from 
council buildings and the schools that it looks 
after, street lighting, business mileage and fleet 
vehicles.
The image on the next page shows the breakdown of carbon emissions from domestic 
buildings, transport and non-domestic buildings. The information illustrates that the emissions 
are split fairly evenly 3 ways between these sources. 
South Gloucestershire carbon baseline
06/11/2019
CLIMATE EMERGENCY STRATEGY
www.southglos.gov.uk /climatechange14South Gloucestershire carbon emissions baseline gap analysis:
Due to the complexity of collecting the necessary data, this information takes two years 
to compile which is why the data is from 2017. This data is provided by the government’s 
Department of Business Economy and Industrial Strategy (BEIS).
2017 South Gloucestershire carbon baseline emissions
Agricultural emissions in this image show the carbon emissions only because it is only the 
carbon emissions that have been monitored for the local area over time. However, there are 
wider greenhouse gas emissions from agriculture which have an impact on climate change such 
as methane. Reducing these wider greenhouse gas emissions is also a critical part of responding 
to the Climate Emergency. 
This report also shows a breakdown of land use in South Gloucestershire:
South Gloucestershire district – land use breakdownOther than agriculture, emissions can be split into 
approximate thirds, between domestic  properties,  
non-domestic  properties and emissions from 
transport . 
Emissions from road transport  contribute 
383,400t CO2e from 2,800 vehicles.
Emissions from domestic  properties contribute 
342,000t CO2e from 115,000 dwellings.
Energy consumption from non-domestic  
properties contributes around 308,500t CO2e 
from 5,750 buildings.
Energy consumption from the agricultural  sector 
emits around 15,000t CO2e. This doesn't account 
for all agricultural emissions.64%
98.8%1.2%15%6%7%
8%
T otal 
1048,900
 tonnes CO₂eDomesticNon-domestic
Power
Power
FuelHeat
Heat
Agriculture
Transport
Source: Regen analysis of emissions from heat, power and transport in 
South Gloucestershire, BEIS data for agriculture energy consumption
64%
98.8%1.2%15%6%7%
8%
T otal 
1048,900
 tonnes CO₂eDomesticNon-domestic
Power
Power
FuelHeat
Heat
Agriculture
TransportResidential and gardens
Forests, open land and water
Agriculture
Transport and utilities
OtherDomestic  Non-domestic  Transport  Agriculture15
CLIMATE EMERGENCY STRATEGY
www.southglos.gov.uk /climatechangeThis report also sets out a pathway of actions that can help South Gloucestershire to reduce 
emissions to net zero by 2030.
The pathway to success  towards net zero sees significant and rapid reductions in emissions 
from both heat and power by 2030. 
To get emissions across the area to decrease we will need: 
 yA very high uptake of electric vehicles and a reduction of mileage, 
 yVery high reductions in road transport emissions from around 380 to around 220 kt CO2e. 
(Changes in fuel type as well as lower mileage),
 yAlmost all domestic properties to be insulated to at least an Energy Performance 
Certificate band of C (this is an energy efficiency rating for homes) reducing emissions up 
to 44%, 
 yAll non-domestic properties to reduce their energy consumption by 10%. Electricity 
supply is decarbonised at a national level much faster than current predictions. 
 yIn 2019 the direct carbon emissions produced by South Gloucestershire Council were 
only 1.2% of the total area emissions. Direct emissions are the emissions that come from 
the buildings and schools that the council owns, street lighting, fleet and business mileage. 
Direct emissions from South Gloucestershire Council & South Gloucestershire district
 
South Gloucestershire Council – area wide influence
The council can influence around 40% of carbon emissions through its powers in planning, 
transport and waste. 
The council can also influence carbon emissions from homes and businesses and work with 
organisations across the area to enable others to respond to the Climate Emergency. 64%
98.8%1.2%15%6%7%
8%
T otal 
1048,900
 tonnes CO₂eDomesticNon-domestic
Power
Power
FuelHeat
Heat
Agriculture
TransportThe council’s direct emissions 
are only 1.2% of the total area 
emissions, The Councils’ indirect 
emissions from the goods 
and services that it buys are 
estimated at 6.5% of the total 
area emissions and the council 
can reduce these emissions by 
the approach it takes.CLIMATE EMERGENCY STRATEGY
www.southglos.gov.uk /climatechange16The Local Strategic Partnership – area wide influence
The Local Strategic Partnership has responsibility for driving forward area wide action on 
Climate Emergency. It is made up of a number of major organisations in our area such as the 
Avon Fire & Rescue Service, Airbus, University of the West of England, Avon and Somerset 
Police and many other organisations that all work together for the benefit of the area. 
Further evidence needed
As part of our Climate Emergency response we will be carrying out further research on local 
climate resilience and the measures that we need to take in the area to prepare for the local 
impacts of climate change. We will also look in more detail at the councils’ direct emissions 
(for example from buildings, waste management services and street lighting) and the indirect 
emissions (the services and goods we buy). 
We will also need more in-depth research on the different local sources of our area wide 
emissions and this will enable us to tackle them more effectively. 
Where suitable evidence is produced it will be made publically available on our website at 
www.southglos.gov.uk/environment/climate-change/climate-emergency
The Council’s role
A strong response to the Climate Emergency by the council will require the council to perform 
three key roles. These are:
To LEAD   by example – to make our own operations and services carbon neutral, climate 
resilient and nature friendly (and by no later than 2030).  
To ENABLE  a low carbon, climate and ecologically resilient and thriving district through 
our policies, programmes, operations and decision-making. 
To INSPIRE   local residents, communities and businesses as well as national Government 
and agencies to take fast climate and ecological action themselves.
Over the 10 years we will be adding to this evidence base and provide access to documents 
where relevant on the councils website. 17
CLIMATE EMERGENCY STRATEGY
www.southglos.gov.uk /climatechangeThe governing bodies
There are a range of groups both inside and outside the council who help to steer the council’s 
response to the Climate Emergency declaration. The chart below sets out a list of the groups 
that exist and what role they have in terms of the delivery of the plan. 
The Climate Emergency Standing Group  are a cross party group of councillors who provide 
political scrutiny of the Council’s Climate Emergency plan. 
The Clean Air and Climate Change Board are a group of key council officers from across the 
council who are responsible for making sure that plans to tackle air quality and climate change 
have the best outcomes for both issues. They are also responsible for overseeing the delivery 
of the Climate Emergency Action Plans.
The Carbon Management Group  are a group of key council officers who work to reduce the 
council’s own carbon emissions from the buildings owned, transport used and what the council 
buys. 
The Internal Auditing Team check that the council is putting the correct staffing, resources, 
governance and monitoring procedures in place to deliver on the Climate Emergency 
declaration. 
The West of England Combined Authority (WECA) has also declared a Climate Emergency. 
WECA has key responsibilities around Transport, Housing and Economic Development and 
Skills, and therefore have a big impact on how the region responds to the Climate Emergency.  
www.westofengland-ca.gov.uk/climate-emergency-declared-west-england-combined-
authority/
The West of England Nature Partnership (WENP)  works closely with local authorities and 
environmental partners across the West of England area to champion and optimise nature 
recovery across the region: www.wenp.org.uk
West of England - local authorities
Bristol City Council, North Somerset and Bath and North East Somerset  have also declared 
Climate Emergencies and we are working closely with them to deliver our shared aims across 
the region. 
South Gloucestershire Climate Emergency University Advisory Group  is a group of 
independent technical experts based at the University of the West of England who check that 
the action plans we produce cover the right projects and undertake the right action to deliver 
on the Climate Emergency declaration. 
The Local Strategic Partnership (as referred to above) this is a longstanding group of major 
organisations from both the public and private sector. In combination this group influence a 
significant amount of the areas carbon emissions and are responsible for the area wide delivery 
of the Climate Emergency Action Plans. www.ourareaourfuture.org.uk/the-partnershipCLIMATE EMERGENCY STRATEGY
www.southglos.gov.uk /climatechange18Climate Emergency Community Engagement Group 
This is a public group jointly run by CVS South Gloucestershire  and South Gloucestershire 
Council. Anyone in South Gloucestershire can join. This group brings organisations and 
individuals together working to scale up our area wide response to the Climate Emergency. 
It has a steering group made up of members of the group from across different communities. 
For more information visit: www.southglos.gov.uk/environment/climate-change/climate-
emergency-community-engagement
For more information about any of these groups or to join the community engagement group 
email Climate.Emergency@southglos.gov.uk  
Climate Emergency Action Plan governance structure
Cabinet  
Role: owners
 Emergency Action PlanWest of England Combined 
Authority  
Role: regional delivery partnersClimate Emergency  
Standing Group  
Role: scrutiny plan/deliveryINTERNAL EXTERNAL
STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT
Local Strategic Partnership
Climate Emergency  
Role: area wide deliveryCarbon Management Group  
Role: deliver zero carbon 
CouncilAdvisory Committee  
Role: technical advisorsClean Air and Climate  
Change Board 
Internal Officers  
Role: advise/coordinate
Climate Emergency  
community engagement
Role: area wide deliverySGC Internal Auditing Team
Role: audit plan/deliveryClimate Emergency 
Team  
Role: Responsible plan 
development/delivery19
CLIMATE EMERGENCY STRATEGY
www.southglos.gov.uk /climatechange
Climate change and equalities
Climate change will affect some groups in society more than others. This will depend on a 
range of factors such as where you live, your age, your health, your home, how much money 
you have and how much access to the natural world you have. For example it is likely that the 
local impacts of climate change will lead to more frequent extreme weather events and cause 
greater extremes in outdoor temperatures, which can have a worse impact on older people and 
young children who are generally less able to regulate their body temperature. Those on lower 
incomes are likely to experience greater impacts from climate change which can be related to 
poor quality housing, lack of access to nature and poor transport options. 
We want to ensure that the Climate Emergency action plans recognise the impacts that 
different groups will face and that the plans will take great steps to remove any inequalities in 
the impacts experienced by different groups. Each Climate Emergency action plan will have an 
equalities impact assessment for the new projects being delivered in the plan to make sure that 
the projects act on equalities issues. CLIMATE EMERGENCY STRATEGY
www.southglos.gov.uk /climatechange20Climate Emergency Action Plan - key themes
Cross cutting  
This theme contains projects that deliver benefits across all 
our Climate Emergency work.
Buildings/built development  
This theme looks at both residential and non-residential buildings and 
their location, layout, design, construction and the contribution they can 
make to the health and wellbeing of humans and the natural world. 
Transport and infrastructure  
This theme looks at transport projects from walking and cycling, public  
transport and mileage reduction, to electric vehicles and reducing internal 
combustion engine car use. Infrastructure is about looking at our roads,  
bridges, sewage systems, parks and green spaces to reduce emissions,  
prepare for local impacts and support nature recovery. 
Renewable energy  
This theme looks at projects that can increase the amount of renewable 
energy we have in this area.
Resources and waste  
This theme looks at projects that can reduce emissions from resource waste  
and how we can move towards a society that no longer wastes resources. 
Green Infrastructure and nature recovery  
This theme is about projects that help landscapes, trees, plants and 
wildlife to thrive for the benefit of people and wildlife.
Adaptation/resilience  
This theme is about preparing for the local impacts of climate change and 
changing some of the ways that we do things to be more suited to the  
changing climate. 
How will we know that the plan is the right one to deliver the 
changes that are needed?
To ensure that the plans put in place will support the council to enable South Gloucestershire 
to become carbon neutral by 2030, we are seeking independent input into the plans from an 
external technical advisory committee. 
We will also seek public input into our work as we go forward. 



21
CLIMATE EMERGENCY STRATEGY
www.southglos.gov.uk /climatechangeReview of the plans
Each year the Climate Emergency Action Plan will be reviewed to see how much progress has 
been made. As we only have until 2030 for delivery, if projects are not delivered or do not 
deliver enough in terms of changes this will mean that more work will be needed in later years. 
An update will be made every year in December. These reports will be publically available and 
will come through the councils’ decision-making processes at public meetings. 
As part of monitoring progress against our aims we will annually report the following indicators 
in our Quality of Life Report:
 yCarbon dioxide emissions from the local authority area 
 yThe proportion of South Gloucestershire’s total local energy demand generated from 
renewable energy installations located within South Gloucestershire
The following sources of data are already used:
 yCarbon emissions - Each year the Department of Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy 
(BEIS) provide a breakdown of CO2 emissions by local authority area (published 2 years 
in arrears) and this is used to measure progress against the aim of South Gloucestershire 
becoming carbon neutral by 2030. We report on this as a percentage reduction from the 
1990 baseline emissions figure of 2,073.3 kt Co2e.
 yRenewable energy generation - a renewable energy annual progress report is produced 
which calculates the renewable energy capacity installed in South Gloucestershire and 
the amount of energy generated. This is compared with the current total local energy 
demand for South Gloucestershire (which includes energy demand from power, heat and 
transport) to give a proportional figure. 
Funding and finance
We are committing a significant amount of resources into the Climate Emergency response, 
however we recognise that these resources will need to be supplemented by funding from 
the private sector, grant funding and income generation strategies. Currently the full costs of 
delivering our Climate Emergency pledge are not known. Crucially, we need to seek further 
evidence on the cost of not implementing measures which will lead to further cost impacts 
down the line. For example, new homes that are not built to a zero carbon standard will need 
to be retrofitted and any residual emissions offset and this is highly likely to be more costly than 
building to zero carbon standards from the outset. CLIMATE EMERGENCY STRATEGY
www.southglos.gov.uk /climatechange22
National, regional and local policy
National change
To deliver our Climate Emergency pledge we will need to work with National Government to 
develop and implement policies that will support the delivery of our Climate Emergency pledge. 
Current government policy is for the UK to reach net zero carbon emissions by 2050. Whilst 
this is later than our Climate Emergency declaration many of the policies needed to deliver the 
2050 pledge will support us to deliver our 2030 pledge. 
 yThe national policies that will influence our work on Climate Emergency are as follows: 
 yNational Planning policy
 yTransport policy
 yEnergy policy
 yFiscal (financial) policy
 yAgricultural policy
 yEnvironmental policy
23
CLIMATE EMERGENCY STRATEGY
www.southglos.gov.uk /climatechangeRegional change 
Working with the West of England Combined Authority (WECA). WECA also declared a 
Climate Emergency in July 2019 and have been putting in place plans to tackle the Climate 
Emergency through the regional work the authority does on economic development, skills, 
housing and transport strategy. The public can follow WECA’s decision making and meetings 
on the website: www.westofengland-ca.gov.uk
Alongside WECA our neighbouring local authority areas of Bristol CC, Bath and North East 
Somerset and North Somerset have also declared climate emergencies pledging to become 
carbon neutral by 2030. We are working closely with them to share ideas, data and work 
jointly on projects. 
Local change 
The council needs to use its local policy powers in transport, planning and waste to respond to 
the Climate Emergency and to enable others to act. 
Working together 
We are absolutely aware that the Council 
cannot deliver this Climate Emergency 
pledge without the shared commitment 
and action of every single person in this 
area. 
We wish to show leadership in action on 
climate change and to enable others to 
act and provide a coordination role but 
we are aware that we cannot be and that 
we are not the only leaders. Many people 
from our community are taking leadership 
roles within their own organisations and 
communities and we need many more 
people to do this. 
We will be working through our Local 
Strategic Partnership that has the 
membership of key organisations and businesses from our communities. 
However, we recognise that we need leaders to come forward from all groups including:
 yBusiness and commerce
 yCommunities
 yIndividuals 
 yFaith groups
 yYouth groups
 yVoluntary and community sector
 yPublic health sector 
 yEducation sector
 yAgricultural sector
CLIMATE EMERGENCY STRATEGY
www.southglos.gov.uk /climatechange24Not only do we need leaders from across the area but we need to come together as a society 
to scale up the changes to the speed of the transition required. 
We aim to work with people in all these different groups and structures within our society 
and during the first year of delivering the plan we intend to develop a communications and 
stakeholder engagement plan. 
To find out the latest about what we are doing and how you can get involved please visit:  
www.southglos.gov.uk/climatechange
Sign our South Gloucestershire Climate Emergency Pledge 
If you would like to contact us to tell us about what you/your group are doing at:  
www.southglos.gov.uk/environment/climate-change/climate-emergency/ 
Delivery 
This strategy sets out the plan for South Gloucestershire to transform our area in response to 
climate change. The route for delivering actions will be
detailed in delivery plans, which will be developed and acted on. To deliver we will need:
 yCommitted, collective, and collaborative leadership from across our area lead by our Local 
Strategic Partnership and our network of partner organisations, and communities 
 yActive engagement with residents, businesses and organisations across South 
Gloucestershire.
Climate Emergency Action Plans
Every year for 10 years leading up to 2030 a Climate Emergency Action Plan will be published 
with this strategy document and all plans will be held online 
To contact the Climate Emergency Team email: Climate.Emergency@southglos.gov.uk
Appendices 
Appendix 1: South Gloucestershire Climate Emergency Declaration
Appendix 2: Climate Emergency Year 1 Action Plan
Appendix 3: Climate Emergency Year 1 Action Plan (Climate Emergency Budget)25
www.southglos.gov.uk /climatechangeCLIMATE EMERGENCY STRATEGY: APPENDIX 1
Appendix 1:  
SOUTH GLOUCESTERSHIRE COUNCIL TO  
DECLARE A CLIMATE EMERGENCY
Joint Motion:   South Gloucestershire Council to declare a  
Climate Emergency and sign the UK100 Pledge
This Council notes: 
1. That runaway climate change constitutes an existential threat to human society and life on 
Earth;  
2. That humans have already caused irreversible climate change, the impacts of which are 
being felt around the world;
3. That average global temperatures have now increased by 1°C above pre-industrial levels;
4. That, according to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) special report 
published in January 2019, the world is now on track to overshoot the Paris Agreement’s 
1.5°C limit before 2050 – the consequences of which would be dire and irreversible;  
5. That, consequently, it is no longer adequate to think of climate change as a potential 
future threat, but rather, it must now be treated as a real and present danger to the lives 
and life-chances of people now living as well as to those yet born, and to the natural 
world; 
6. That the IPCC report tells us that limiting global warming to 1.5°C may still be possible – 
but only with ambitious action from national and sub-national authorities, civil society, the 
private sector, and local communities; 
7. Earlier this year, the Committee on Climate Change has said that the UK can reach Net 
Zero by 2050 and set out the required steps to achieving this;
8. Governments and Councils are declaring a ‘Climate Emergency’ across the world and are 
committing resources to address this emergency; 
9. That South Gloucestershire Council is now the only constituent authority within WECA 
not to have declared a Climate Emergency and signed the UK100 Pledge. 
This Council further notes that:
1. This South Gloucestershire Climate Change Strategy 2018-2023, which was published 
on the same day at the IPCC report, currently outlines an emissions reduction of 80% by 
2050, which at that time was in line with existing UK Government targets; 
2. On June 12 2019 the government announced to amend the current UK greenhouse gas 
emissions reduction target of an 80% reduction by 2050 to cut greenhouse gas emissions 
to almost net zero by 2050;
3. In 2016, South Gloucestershire’s emissions were measured to be 41% lower than in 1990, 
which is in line with the national decline in emissions;www.southglos.gov.uk /climatechange26CLIMATE EMERGENCY STRATEGY: APPENDIX 1
4. The Council’s direct emissions are now 50% lower than in the baseline year 2009/10;
5. The Council’s direct emissions represent 1.32% of the total emissions for South 
Gloucestershire, but the Council has the ability to have significant influence over around 
40% of emissions through planning for housing and transport, waste management and 
through demonstrating leadership and partnership working with the wider community;
6. The emissions for South Gloucestershire are equal to 4.4 tonnes for each resident, 35% of 
emissions came from industry and commercial sources, 32% from domestic sources, and 
33% from road transport (excluding motorways);
7. The Government currently uses the independent Climate Change Committee - a strong 
model that is signed up to by all political parties to offer guidance which can be emulated 
at a local level through Scrutiny Commission;
8. Action plans are currently being compiled, meaning any further improvements to targets 
could be integrated into future work – for example, existing procurement frameworks 
have a social value, which looks at environmental benefits, among others, but this could 
be given further weight.
Council therefore resolves to:  
1. Declare a Climate Emergency;
2. Pledge to provide the leadership to enable South Gloucestershire to become carbon 
neutral by 2030;
3. To lobby the Government and DEFRA, through the Council and our MPs, to reassess 
policy and investment to provide the tools to achieve Net Zero by 2030 and to provide 
assistance in the delivery of the Council’s timeline through new powers and resources;
4. Sign up to the UK100 Pledge to provide the strategic community leadership needed to 
enable our communities to achieve 100% clean energy across all sectors; 
5. Request that the Cabinet takes steps to identify work streams and budgets with the aim 
of making South Gloucestershire Council carbon neutral by 2030, across all functions, as 
our contribution to fighting climate change;
6. Request Cabinet to work with the West of England Combined Authority (WECA) and our 
West of England partners to produce an ambitious delivery plan for the West of England 
Energy Strategy to use as a key tool for seeking Government funding to help us deliver 
our 2030 target;
7. Update the South Gloucestershire Climate Change Strategy to reflect the increased 
urgency and ambition outlined in this motion, and, with our partners across the 
community, to develop an action plan and ‘route map’ to a sustainable, low carbon future 
for our community and also to reflect the new proposed national target of net zero by 
2050;
8. Request an initial progress report to the December 2019 meeting of Council with an 
annual report on progress to full Council thereafter;
9. To task Scrutiny Commission with forming a Task & Finish group to assess how South 
Gloucestershire Council can reach Net Zero by 2030 and feed into the initial report to 
Full Council. This would include producing an additional report analysing the gaps within 
our current plans to enable the area to meet net zero emissions.27
www.southglos.gov.uk /climatechangeCLIMATE EMERGENCY STRATEGY: APPENDIX 2
Appendix 2:  
CLIMATE EMERGENCY ACTION PLAN  
– FUNDED PROJECTS
This is the list of projects that already have funding within existing budgets. 
Climate Emergency theme:  
Cross-cutting 
COUNCIL COMMITMENT PROJECT STAGE
LEAD
We will embed climate and ecological considerations in the new Council Plan, 
prioritising climate change, nature recovery, GI and biodiversity in all council 
strategies - a 'green thread' to operate through all areas of council decision making, 
influence and operations.         DEVELOP
We will seek advice to guide treasury management investment 
d e c i s i o n s  t o  b e  m a d e  i n  r e s p o n s e  t o  t h e  C l i m a t e  E m e r g e n c y .                                                                                                                                        
      PREPARE
We will further embed climate and ecological considerations in Council 
procurement activity and our supply chain. DEVELOP
We will develop a Clean Air Action Plan that aligns with the Climate Emergency 
Action Plans.DEVELOP
We will scope the setting up of a Green South Gloucestershire Fund for South 
Gloucestershire which receives contributions from developers, businesses and 
residents for investment in renewable energy projects, retrofitting projects, green 
infrastructure and habitat/biodiversity projects, for example.   DEVELOP
Preparation of a Climate Emergency Strategy Document. DEVELOP
Monitoring, review and reporting including the preparation of the annual progress 
report on Climate Emergency.DEVELOP
ENABLE  
We will continue to lobby Government in areas where policy direction or change is 
required to help us address the Climate Emergency.  DEVELOP
We will incorporate Climate Emergency and nature recovery principles into the 
emerging West of England Cultural Strategy. DEVELOPwww.southglos.gov.uk /climatechange28CLIMATE EMERGENCY STRATEGY: APPENDIX 2
COUNCIL COMMITMENT PROJECT STAGE
INSPIRE  
We will incorporate Climate Emergency and nature recovery principles into our new 
Economic Development Strategy (2020-2024). IMPLEMENT
We will support the Community and Voluntary Sector to deliver a climate change 
focused conference – A Climate of Change and produce Environmental Standards 
Toolkit.IMPLEMENT
We will continue to support the work of the Centre for Digital Engineering, 
Technology and Innovation through our WECA membership to deliver outcomes 
which could have major impacts on the future of transport and clean energy. DEVELOP
We will continue to support the work of the TEC ARC zone which brings businesses 
(major and Small to Medium Sized Enterprises) together with academia and public 
sector to help address issues within a defined area, that not only benefits South 
Gloucestershire/West of England but can have global impact. DEVELOP29
www.southglos.gov.uk /climatechangeCLIMATE EMERGENCY STRATEGY: APPENDIX 2
Climate Emergency theme:  
Buildings/built development 
COUNCIL COMMITMENT PROJECT STAGE
LEAD
We will continue funding Severn Wye Energy Agency to deliver the existing Warm 
and Well Scheme. IMPLEMENT
We will look to continue to fund the Centre for Sustainable Energy (CSE) to 
undertake a number of primary school workshops (Key Stage 2 are designed around 
the issues of energy and climate change, with wind and solar power practical 
sessions) and outreach events.IMPLEMENT
We will provide a community outreach worker (Energy Advocate) for 2 years 
funded through a grant from the Energy Saving Trust to be embedded with Sirona 
Healthcare from Feb 2020.IMPLEMENT
We will enforce the Minimum Energy Efficiency Standards (MEES) in private rented 
accommodation to ensure unless exempt all properties are EPC rated E or above.IMPLEMENT
We will encourage our HomesWest partners to deliver to high energy efficiency 
standards for affordable housing schemes, through the use of building materials and 
methods, such as Modern Methods of Construction (MMC). DEVELOP
We have switched to a Green Energy Tariff for Council buildings contract starts 
April 2020 for electricity and gas, and we will work with schools to do this too. New 
energy contract needs to be in place for 21/22. Schools will be offered opportunity 
to join in and procure green energy.DEVELOP
We will use Modern Methods of Construction to deliver the housing on The 
Grange which typically delivers better energy efficiency, lower carbon emissions 
and less waste in construction. We will encourage bids to develop the site to deliver 
energy efficiency standards above current planning policy.IMPLEMENT
We will undertake a feasibility study to assess the potential for the Bristol & Bath 
Science Park to become net zero carbon. PREPARE
Assessment of the impact of achieving net zero carbon on projects currently in the 
capital programme.PREPAREwww.southglos.gov.uk /climatechange30CLIMATE EMERGENCY STRATEGY: APPENDIX 2
COUNCIL COMMITMENT PROJECT STAGE
ENABLE  
We will work with our partners to put in place a strategic planning document for 
the West of England area that responds to Climate Emergency and nature recovery.DEVELOP
We will prepare a robust Local Plan with Climate Emergency embedded into the 
guiding principles, spatial strategy and policies to ensure that new development 
responds to Climate Emergency and nature recovery.DEVELOP
We will continue to progress ‘net zero carbon’ development policies through the 
Local Plan and update the supporting  evidence base. DEVELOP
Until the local plan is in place, we will seek to use measures, such as interim 
planning policies and guidance, to help ensure that all new development coming 
forward addresses the 2030 carbon neutral South Gloucestershire target. IMPLEMENT
When making decisions on planning applications we will afford appropriate weight 
to climate change as a material planning consideration as defined by the Council’s 
declaration of a Climate Emergency, the NPPF and the amended Climate Change 
Act 2008 (27/06/2019) which takes in to account the revised target of Net Zero 
Carbon emissions by 2050. IMPLEMENT
We will progress our master-planning work for Yate town centre and ensure that 
Climate Emergency and nature recovery considerations are fully incorporated.DEVELOP
We will progress the regeneration of Kingswood town centre through the ‘Love our 
High Streets’ project, maximising low carbon and nature recovery outcomes.DEVELOP
We will continue to lobby government to recommend changes to Part L of the 
building regulations match local ambitions. DEVELOP
We will continue to provide subsidised loans to home owners to improve insulation 
and install renewable technologies.IMPLEMENT31
www.southglos.gov.uk /climatechangeCLIMATE EMERGENCY STRATEGY: APPENDIX 2
Climate Emergency theme:  
Transport (and infrastructure/highways) 
COUNCIL COMMITMENT PROJECT STAGE
LEAD
Where we are and how we need to get there – getting around  
South Gloucestershire.  
We will commission evidence gathering to see what is required to achieve our 
Climate Emergency and nature recovery aims for transport, for input into the JLTP 
review process. This will seek to estimate the reduction in travel and mode shift 
required to meet zero carbon by 2030. DEVELOP
Where we are and how we need to get there – carbon neutral fleet.   
We will undertake a baseline carbon footprint study of South Gloucestershire 
Council fleet, SGC grey fleet (staff car claims private mileage) and school transport. 
This will consider the business need for travel and mode, consider best practice 
examples of fleet management approaches.PREPARE
Implement a new Highways Asset Management Plan  that adopts low carbon 
maintenance strategies and promotes the use of verges for carbon sequestration 
and biodiversity. IMPLEMENT
Monitoring and evaluation  
We will continue to expand monitoring equipment and collect data for transport 
and air quality to help inform decision making. Using opportunities such as the 
Umbrella Digital test bed we will look to utilise the most suitable equipment and 
techniques available. IMPLEMENT
Street lighting programme  
We will continue to roll out the Street Lighting LED replacement programme. IMPLEMENT
Delivery of walking and cycling infrastructure  
We will deliver the Cribbs – Patchway New Neighbourhood Cycle links package 
(part of the Local Cycling Walking Infrastructure Plan).IMPLEMENT
Delivery of Metrobus extension   
We will deliver the Cribbs/Patchway Metrobus extension infrastructure to extend 
Metrobus from Bristol Parkway station to the new neighbourhood. IMPLEMENT
Delivery of Park and Ride facility for Yate  
Design and deliver a Park and Ride facility for Yate to intercept journeys made by 
car and enable people to transfer to more sustainable modes. Build to best practice 
design.DEVELOPwww.southglos.gov.uk /climatechange32CLIMATE EMERGENCY STRATEGY: APPENDIX 2
COUNCIL COMMITMENT PROJECT STAGE
ENABLE  
Increase bus patronage  
We will consult on and adopt a bus strategy to identify future investment in mass 
transport and network improvement.DEVELOP
Prioritise walking and cycling  
We will consult on and adopt a “local walking and cycling and infrastructure plan” 
for towns and urban areas.DEVELOP
Rail investment  
Deliver Metrowest improvements to provide half hour frequency on suburban rail 
network and new rail stations at North Filton and Henbury. We will continue to 
work with partners to deliver a new railway station at Charfield to be opened by 
2024.DEVELOP
Deliver behaviour change  
We are delivering a package of travel behaviour change measures to communities, 
businesses, schools through developer contributions and Access West Programme 
2021/22. IMPLEMENT
Work Collaboratively with our Supply Chain to reduce streamline operational 
activities to reduce avoidable carbon in our maintenance and management of 
highways and open space infrastructure. DEVELOP
Continue to lead in the Highways Sector on Resilience and Adaptation  through 
the Association of Directors for Environment, Economy, Planning and Transport, 
Local Government Technical Advisors Group and South West Highways Alliance 
work. Contributing to National Guidance and new approaches. DEVELOP33
www.southglos.gov.uk /climatechangeCLIMATE EMERGENCY STRATEGY: APPENDIX 2
Climate Emergency theme:  
Renewable energy 
COUNCIL COMMITMENT PROJECT STAGE
LEAD
We will undertake a feasibility study with South West Energy hub for solar PV on 
waste sites, community farm and council owned carparks.EMERGENCY 
RESPONSE
We will continue to provide subsidised loans to home owners for renewable 
technologies (Wessex CIC loans).* SEE BUILDINGS? BUILT DEVELOPMENT.TRANSITION
We will prioritise Solar PV investment on council owned built assets and 
infrastructure, avoiding undeveloped land particularly with good natural capital 
value including high grade agriculture land.EMERGENCY 
RESPONSE
We propose to develop a business case for Council-led renewable energy 
development and investment.EMERGENCY 
RESPONSE
ENABLE  
We will undertake a renewable energy resource assessment study to inform Local 
Plan policy and to safeguard suitable areas for renewable energy installations.  
The study will also inform South Gloucestershire Council led renewable energy 
development decisions.PREPARE
We will lobby Government to seek the removal of planning barriers to onshore 
wind development. DEVELOP
INSPIRE  
We propose to participate in a West of England Solar Together solar PV bulk buying 
scheme for domestic retrofit.IMPLEMENTwww.southglos.gov.uk /climatechange34CLIMATE EMERGENCY STRATEGY: APPENDIX 2
Climate Emergency theme:  
Green infrastructure and nature recovery 
COUNCIL COMMITMENT PROJECT STAGE
LEAD
West of England Green Infrastructure Strategy  
We will continue to work with partners on the West of England Green 
Infrastructure Strategy preparation and delivery. DEVELOP
South Glos Green Infrastructure Strategy & Action Plan  
We will complete, consult on and adopt the South Gloucestershire Green 
Infrastructure Strategy and Action Plan, to optimise GI asset management for 
climate change, nature recovery, health and community adaptation, mitigation and 
resilience. DEVELOP
Biodiversity net gain (BNG) and district licensing  
We will consider the evidence and recommendations of consultants regarding the 
West of England application of Biodiversity Net Gain and District Licensing ahead 
of the new Environment Bill legislation. DEVELOP
Ash Die Back Action Plan  
We will develop and implement an Ash Dieback Action Plan including assessment, 
prioritisation, works and replanting recommendations.DEVELOP/
IMPLEMENT
ENABLE  
Kingswood Park Lottery Bid  
We will submit a £2.5 million National Lottery heritage Fund bid for Kingswood 
Park – to conserve and enhance the park and engage the local community.IMPLEMENT
Green South Gloucestershire – Green Infrastructure and Nature Recovery 
Portfolio  
We will scope development of a GI and nature recovery investment portfolio 
as part of the Green South Gloucestershire Fund, this will include tree planting 
and habitat creation, restoration and enhancement for carbon sequestration, 
sponsorship and dedication e.g. ‘a hectare of wildflower meadow’, ‘a km of new 
hedgerow’, tree planting, engagement projects etc. This will be a key funding 
mechanism for scaling up our Climate Emergency Action Plan work. DEVELOP
River Frome reconnected  
We will continue to deliver the River Frome Reconnected Project to create a 
connected river catchment where people, communities and nature are thriving and 
resilient.IMPLEMENT35
www.southglos.gov.uk /climatechangeCLIMATE EMERGENCY STRATEGY: APPENDIX 2
Climate Emergency theme:  
Resources and waste  
COUNCIL COMMITMENT PROJECT STAGE
LEAD
Strategy   
We will adopt the South Gloucestershire’s ‘Resource and Waste Strategy 2020 and 
Beyond’ with ambitious targets to build on existing success and drive recycling to 
70% with zero to landfill by 2030. We will complete and publish an annual review 
of performance against the aims of the Resource and Waste Strategy 2020 and 
Beyond.DEVELOP/
IMPLEMENT
West of England Strategy and Circular Economy  
With our West of England partners, we will publish a strategy that sets out how our 
Waste Partnership will continue to work together to make the most efficient use of 
resources and develop a circular economy in the West of England. DEVELOP
Future delivery model  
We will commence planning work to ensure interim arrangements for when our 
Private Finance Initiative contract with Suez comes to an end in 2025 support the 
council aim to be carbon neutral by 2030.DEVELOP
Carbon emissions baseline  
Update carbon model and test actions plans to ensure driving service to net carbon 
gain. PREPARE
ENABLE  
Mangotsfield   
We will develop Mangotsfield household waste and recycling centre to include a 
new slip road to reduce traffic congestion and provide biodiversity offset measures. IMPLEMENT
Processing and Haulage  
We will review and implement changes to waste processing facilities and haulage to 
reduce distance travelled and carbon.DEVELOP/
IMPLEMENT  
First phase to be 
implemented 2020 
further changes 
22-23
North Fringe Site  
We will open a new waste and recycling centre with reuse facilities to support the 
new housing developments in the north fringe of South Gloucestershire.IMPLEMENT
Tree Planting  
We will plant 5,000 trees at a closed landfill site to create future woodland and 
carbon offset.IMPLEMENT  
Due to be completed 
2020 transition/
scaling up activitywww.southglos.gov.uk /climatechange36CLIMATE EMERGENCY STRATEGY: APPENDIX 2
COUNCIL COMMITMENT PROJECT STAGE
INSPIRE  
Clean streets  
We will continue to support and promote voluntary groups in clean street 
campaigns such as the spring clean. IMPLEMENT
Behavioural change   
We will continue to engage with residents to drive behavioural change including a 
campaign to reduce food waste.IMPLEMENT
Share success  
We will share successes with our communities and inspire them to inspire others 
to build on that success, whilst supporting actions to address the climate change 
emergency.IMPLEMENT
Climate Emergency theme:  
Theme: adaptation and resilience
COUNCIL COMMITMENT PROJECT STAGE
LEAD
We will continue to utilise the Highways Infrastructure Resilience Assessment 
Modelling tool to inform highway management and related works. IMPLEMENT
We will assess surface water flooding risks updating mapping for the Yate and 
Chipping Sodbury areas.DEVELOP
ENABLE  
We will continue to work on new local plan policies and guidance to ensure new 
development mitigates and adapts to the risks from climate change.*See Buildings/
Built DevelopmentDEVELOP37
www.southglos.gov.uk /climatechangeCLIMATE EMERGENCY STRATEGY: APPENDIX 3
Appendix 3:  
CLIMATE EMERGENCY ACTION PLAN  
– YEAR 1 (2020/21)
The Council Budget for 2020/21 approved in February 2020 allocated £1.7 million over the 
4 year Medium Term Financial Plan (MTFP), in addition to the £85k allocated to early Climate 
Emergency investments in October 2019 and investments through the Capital Programme. 
In addition, funding has been allocated through the Capital Programme to undertake green 
initiatives that support the Climate Emergency through the use of Community Infrastructure 
Levy (CIL) as well as the proposed Property & Land Investment Fund having a strong focus on 
non-financial benefits such as carbon offsetting and biodiversity.
In terms of CIL funding, the budget earmarked that £1.5 million is used each year to support 
the Climate Emergency with an indicative split across the following areas: 
 yGreen Schools £500k
 yGreen Communities and Open Spaces £500k
 yGreen Transport £500k
The following table presents a list of priority projects for Year 1 (2020/21) to support the 
response to the Climate Emergency, over and above, the projects identified in Appendix 2 
that already have funding within existing budgets.   The projects are grouped according to 
the priority themes, and the Council’s role of ‘lead’, ‘enable’ and ‘inspire’.  The specific project 
details, including cost implications, will be worked up and matched against the available budget.  
The projects shaded grey are Capital Expenditure projects. The rest are Revenue expenditure 
from the Climate Emergency and/or other service area budgets.  
 www.southglos.gov.uk /climatechange38CLIMATE EMERGENCY STRATEGY: APPENDIX 3
Climate Emergency theme:  
Cross-cutting
PLANNED ACTIONS (2020/21) PROJECT STAGE
LEAD – in our own operations
We will seek to use / expand the current Bristol Climate Advisory Board.  
Purpose : Provides independent assessment of our Climate Emergency Plan and 
technical support. DEVELOP
We propose to work through the Local Strategic Partnership to take action on 
the Climate Emergency liaising with key emitters and influencers and setting up a 
mechanism for receiving technical advice.  
Purpose : key area emitters and influencers agree and act on advanced targets for 
2030.IMPLEMENT
We propose building capacity to put in place a Climate Emergency team to co-
ordinate, lead and facilitate projects and work on the Climate Emergency.  
Purpose : Increased capacity required to deliver plan. PREPARE
We propose developing a communications and stakeholder engagement 
programme to both inform, share knowledge and facilitate behaviour change in all 
sectors. E.g ‘Switch to a domestic renewable energy tariff’.  
Purpose : Area wide engagement and action on Climate Emergency.IMPLEMENT
To undertake a review of appropriate ISO standards relevant to managing the 
Council’s corporate response to the Climate Emergency and where significant value 
can be demonstrated, to work toward achieving that standard.   
Purpose : Bring whole organisation in line with globally recognised sustainability 
standard. DEVELOP
We will commission a piece of work to identify the most appropriate carbon 
assessment tool to help us understand the impact of our projects and services and 
how to address them.  
Purpose : To measure progress and inform decision making.  PREPARE39
www.southglos.gov.uk /climatechangeCLIMATE EMERGENCY STRATEGY: APPENDIX 3
PLANNED ACTIONS (2020/21) PROJECT STAGE
ENABLE – a low carbon South Gloucestershire with 
our programmes, policies and decisions
We will update our area wide carbon baseline data and initiate further research 
work as necessary to help inform our decision making and evaluate progress against 
the carbon neutral target.  
Purpose : Further analysis required to inform Years 2-10 plan. PREPARE
We will provide all staff and members with carbon and ecological literacy training 
and integrate these principles into staff and member induction and handbook. 
Purpose : To upskill staff and members in Climate Emergency principles.  IMPLEMENT
We will explore opportunities for including Climate and Nature emergency 
messages into our ‘One you South Gloucestershire programme (healthy lifestyles) 
area wide recognising and maximising the co-benefits sustainable/health lifestyles. 
Purpose : To engage with residents on an area wide basis with complementary 
messaging to change behaviour. IMPLEMENT
Set up costs for Green South Gloucestershire Fund – carbon offsetting and natural 
capital.  
Purpose : To provide longer term funding for Climate Emergency project delivery.  DEVELOP
INSPIRE – business and residents to take climate 
action themselves
We propose to use the South Glos News publication to support the Climate 
Emergency response.  
Purpose : To engage with residents on an area wide basis to share knowledge and 
inspire behaviour change.IMPLEMENT
We propose to deliver ‘Environment and Climate Roadshows’ at community events 
alongside the ‘Resources and Waste Roadshow’ and hold events at libraries to 
facilitate behaviour change and to engage with the public on climate actions. 
Purpose : To engage with residents on an area wide bases with complimentary 
messaging to change behaviour. IMPLEMENT
We will support the education sector to develop a Climate Emergency skills 
strategy.  
Purpose : To ensure the area has the skills and training available so that the 
workforce that can take up the jobs that will be created due to the Climate 
Emergency. DEVELOP
We will carry out a climate and nature emergency business engagement 
programme.  
Purpose : Businesses account for a third of carbon emissions in the area, access to 
advice and grants will help them reduce their emissions. IMPLEMENTwww.southglos.gov.uk /climatechange40CLIMATE EMERGENCY STRATEGY: APPENDIX 3
Climate Emergency theme:  
Buildings/built development
PLANNED ACTIONS (2020/21) PROJECT STAGE
LEAD – in our own operations
We propose an in depth council building stock retrofit analysis, including schools, to 
identify and implement a retrofit work programme.  
Purpose : To identify energy efficiency and renewable energy projects, cost and 
feasibility that can be implemented on the council building stock.PREPARE
We will build to high energy efficiency standards, such as Passivhaus, in all council 
developed schools.  E.g. currently planned into the design specification for Elm Park 
School and Lyde Green School.  
Purpose : To upgrade the energy efficiency of projects that are already underway 
where the current budget needs a top up to reach higher energy efficiency/low 
carbon standards.  IMPLEMENT
We propose SGC led development (e.g. schools, community centres & housing) to 
be at least net zero carbon and aspire to be carbon negative, apply biodiversity net 
gain and include adaptive features.  
Purpose : To upgrade the energy efficiency of projects that are already underway 
where the current budget needs a top up to reach higher energy efficiency/low 
carbon standards.  IMPLEMENT
A review of the potential heat that can be used from the Strategic Heat Network. 
Purpose : To establish the extent of the potential benefit to South Gloucestershire’s 
Climate Emergency aims from the strategic heat network to find out how much 
heat could be used to retrofit existing housing. PREPARE
We will explore opportunities to deliver the Emergency Accommodation project on 
the site at Cranleigh Court Road with improved carbon efficiency.  
Purpose : To upgrade the energy efficiency of projects that are already underway 
where the current budget needs a top up to reach higher energy efficiency/low 
carbon standards.  DEVELOP41
www.southglos.gov.uk /climatechangeCLIMATE EMERGENCY STRATEGY: APPENDIX 3
PLANNED ACTIONS (2020/21) PROJECT STAGE
ENABLE – a low carbon South Gloucestershire with 
our programmes, policies and decisions
We propose to significantly expand existing Warm and Well Scheme to tackle 
retrofitting on an area focused basis using targeted marketing.  Maximise take up of 
Energy Company Obligation (ECO3) funding by boosting promotion of scheme and 
making sure that those eligible for government grants get them.  
Purpose : To scale up support for residents to retrofit their homes with energy 
efficiency measures by leveraging in government grants. IMPLEMENT
INSPIRE – business and residents to take climate 
action themselves
Set up a network of retrofit demonstration homes across the area to promote 
retrofitting measures, this could include wildlife friendly gardening and ‘green open 
doors’ events.  
Purpose : To give residents the opportunity to see real houses that have been 
retrofitted and to speak to residents who have had work carried out to give them 
confidence to carry out retrofit works.  IMPLEMENT
A deep retrofit demonstrator home for social rented sector/partnership with social 
rented sector.  
Purpose : To engage registered social landlords to retrofit social housing stock 
across the area.DEVELOPwww.southglos.gov.uk /climatechange42CLIMATE EMERGENCY STRATEGY: APPENDIX 3
Climate Emergency theme:  
Transport (and infrastructure/highways)
PLANNED ACTIONS (2020/21) PROJECT STAGE
LEAD – in our own operations
Assess feasibility to scale up travel plan support for schools including assessing the 
feasibility of providing infrastructure for SGC schools to have electric mini buses.  
Purpose :  To replicate success of Barley Close Primary School increasing low 
carbon travel to school and to provide infrastructure for electric buses where 
suitable.DEVELOP / 
IMPLEMENT
South Glos area wide assessment of EV infrastructure need (local authority 
to identify needs to address market failures and rural EV provision) and policy 
development.  
Purpose : To identify gaps in South Gloucestershire wide provision of EV 
infrastructure.PREPARE
Immediately implement the new Verge Management Strategy element of the Green 
Infrastructure Strategy. To move immediately to sustainable verge management 
supporting nature recovery. IMPLEMENT
Highways maintenance carbon emission impact assessment carbon emissions of 
highway maintenance practices and materials to inform opportunities for reduction.  
Purpose : Current carbon emissions are not measured and are likely to be 
substantial we need to understand these to manage and reduce these. PREPARE
ENABLE – a low carbon South Gloucestershire  
with our programmes, policies and decisions
Taxis - We will develop a plan to 2030 to transition taxis in South Gloucestershire 
to low carbon alternatives.  
Purpose : Taxis make up around 1% of vehicles in the area, they are critical to 
supporting the shift to low carbon travel options, they are a highly visible and 
licencing can be used to influence the types of vehicle in use. PREPARE
INSPIRE – business and residents to take climate 
action themselves
We propose to explore an area wide Low Carbon Travel Rewards Scheme and trial 
measures to deprioritise private car use.  
Purpose : To decrease car use for short journeys and incentivise low carbon travel 
options.IMPLEMENT43
www.southglos.gov.uk /climatechangeCLIMATE EMERGENCY STRATEGY: APPENDIX 3
Climate Emergency theme:  
Renewable energy 
PLANNED ACTIONS (2020/21) PROJECT STAGE
LEAD – in our own operations
We will carry out a study of the opportunities for Solar PV on Schools, and other 
Council owned buildings and explore use of power purchase agreements. Purpose: 
To identify energy efficiency and renewable energy projects, cost and feasibility 
that can be implemented on the council building stock.PREPARE
We will explore the opportunities for Council-led renewable energy development. 
Purpose: To increase renewable energy provision and encourage others to do so 
with their own land. DEVELOP
ENABLE – a low carbon South Gloucestershire  
with our programmes, policies and decisions
We will work with community energy groups to identify and safeguard sites for 
solar PV and wind, and explore opportunities to set up Power Purchase Agreements 
to enable them to secure finance. Purpose: To enable increases in renewable energy 
provision.DEVELOPwww.southglos.gov.uk /climatechange44CLIMATE EMERGENCY STRATEGY: APPENDIX 3
Climate Emergency theme:  
Green infrastructure and nature recovery
PLANNED ACTIONS (2020/21) PROJECT STAGE
LEAD – in our own operations
TREE PLANTING PROGRAMME TO DOUBLE TREE COVER BY 2030  
Create capacity and capability to double tree cover (plus replacement planting 
due to Ash dieback losses) in South Gloucestershire through a programme of tree 
planting on council and third party land. Programme of tree planting on council 
land and highway verges. Co-ordination of tree planting projects, offset/mitigation/
sponsorship planting and hedgerow restoration. First projects to be used for case 
studies and showcase work to engage potential tree planting investors levering 
future income.  
Purpose : To work towards doubling tree canopy cover by 2030 and ensure there 
is the right planting in the right place with appropriate after care, aligned with our 
nature recovery network priorities.DEVELOP/
IMPLEMENT
TREE PLANTING MANAGER  
Purpose : To co-ordinate and deliver work towards doubling tree canopy cover by 
2030.DEVELOP/
IMPLEMENT
ENABLE – a low carbon South Gloucestershire  
with our programmes, policies and decisions
NEW SUPPLEMENTARY PLANNING DOCUMENTS SPD Adopt a suite of SPDs 
covering:  Sustainable drainage and watercourse management; Biodiversity 
Net Gain; Trees on development sites; Green Infrastructure; Public Rights of 
Way. Documents will influence all future development approaches to green 
infrastructure. Purpose: To provide a clear position, requirements and guidance for 
working with developers to protect and enhance biodiversity and nature recovery.DEVELOP45
www.southglos.gov.uk /climatechangeCLIMATE EMERGENCY STRATEGY: APPENDIX 3
PLANNED ACTIONS (2020/21) PROJECT STAGE
GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE MAPPING AND NATURAL CAPITAL ASSESSMENT 
OF SGC GI ASSETS  
Natural capital value assessment of all council owned and managed Green 
Infrastructure Assets to inform decision making and future asset management. 
Enable natural capital valuation by identifying and mapping key current ecosystem 
services and new opportunities including: contribution to carbon sequestration, 
sustainable drainage, cooling, shading, drought resilience, air quality, community, 
health and well-being etc.  
Purpose: Natural Capital Assessment - to assess financial contribution and value 
of green infrastructure to inform decision making, application of mitigation 
hierarchy methodology, new natural capital investment opportunities and full 
capture replacement costs for any losses. Mapping to protect, and enhance existing 
resource.  
HABITAT SURVEYS FOR KEY SITES  
Current data is 30 years old. We propose phase 1 habitat surveys for key sites 
in scope along our nature recovery network/GI corridors and designated sites, 
including resurveying Sites of Nature Conservation Interest, to inform and 
underpin:
• Calculation of natural capital value of assets to inform decision making.
•  Work to improve and increase our Nature Recovery Network – bigger, better, 
more and joined habitat.
• Application of biodiversity net gain.
Purpose:  We cannot protect and enhance our existing priority sites and nature 
recovery network without up to date information.DEVELOP
SOUTH GLOS GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE STRATEGY & ACTION PLAN  
We will deliver, the South Gloucestershire Green Infrastructure Strategy and Action 
Plan, after consulting and adopting, to optimise GI asset management for climate 
change, nature recovery, health and community adaptation and resilience.  
Purpose: Enact plan to deliver GI, nature recovery, biodiversity and Climate 
Emergency goals.DEVELOP/
IMPLEMENT
INSPIRE – business and residents to take climate 
action themselves
NATURE RECOVERY AND HABITAT EXAMPLAR BEST PRACTICE SHOWCASES 
ON OPEN SPACES  
Create exemplar nature recovery and habitat creation and restoration showcase 
examples of best practice including on key roadside verges and open spaces to 
inspire communities, individuals and businesses to adopt similar on their land and/
or partner with the council to fund habitat projects. Combined with education and 
information programme and crowd funding for donations.  
Purpose:  To inspire, raise awareness, inform and empower residents, businesses 
and organisations across South Gloucestershire in practical ways they can help 
nature and wildlife at home, work places and communities.IMPLEMENTwww.southglos.gov.uk /climatechange46CLIMATE EMERGENCY STRATEGY: APPENDIX 3
Climate Emergency theme:  
Resources and waste 
PLANNED ACTIONS (2020/21) PROJECT STAGE
LEAD – in our own operations
On Street Recycling We will provide on street recycling on high streets and high 
footfall areas.  
Purpose : Reduce emissions of waste to landfill, increase public engagement in 
waste reduction and awareness of waste as source of emissions. IMPLEMENT
Climate Emergency theme:  
Adaptation and resilience
PLANNED ACTIONS (2020/21) PROJECT STAGE
LEAD – in our own operations
We propose to work with the Carbon Trust Pathfinder Programme to develop 
a systematic approach to Adaptation and Resilience in South Gloucestershire. 
Purpose : Independent verification that SGC is taking necessary steps across all 
service areas to adapt and make South Gloucestershire resilient to the local impacts 
of climate change. DEVELOP
Highways Network Weather Resilience Risk Review. Quantify and qualify the 
weather resilience risk to highways infrastructure. Update of 2014 (UKCP09) 
work against new climate predictions. Using Highways Infrastructure Resilience 
Assessment Modelling Tool and latest UK Climate Projections 2018 (UKCP18). 
Stress test Street Care emergency weather response plans.IMPLEMENT
ENABLE – a low carbon South Gloucestershire  
with our programmes, policies and decisions
We will use our communications channels to help our partners, residents and 
businesses to adapt and prepare for the likely local impacts of climate change. 
Purpose : Duty to communicate likely local impacts and steps that can be taken to 
prepare homes, business and protect health.IMPLEMENTCLIMATE EMERGENCY STRATEGY
www.southglos.gov.uk /climatechangewww.southglos.gov.uk