Operational Carbon Reduction Plan - Reducing Our Footprint
Scope one
No. CategoryTonnes of CO2 
equivalent 2018/19Notes and information Supporting actions Influence Doing now Carbon saving Biodiversity savingImplementation 
time
1.1Stationary 
combustion85.9“Emissions associated with combustion 
of fuels in stationary equipment 
(typically boilers in buildings).  
 
Consumption data provided for three 
buildings. “Investigate installing much more 
sophisticated thermostats for the 
heating system at Follaton House1 N Med Low 2 years
Investigate alternative heating systems 
- Biomass boilers, Air/Ground source 
heat pumps, additional PV at relevant 
buildings 1 N High Med 5 years
Investigate ‘fabric first approach’ to 
reduce energy needs1 N Med Med 5 years
1.2Owned 
transport3199.4Emissions associated with mobile 
equipment, typically transport 
equipment e.g. Localities vehicles, 
waste collection vehicles, maintenance 
vans, LA owned cars etc. Emissions 
were calculated from two sources. 
Firstly, fuel bought on forecourts data 
available on volume of fuel. Secondly, 
fuel consumption from Waste and 
Cleansing vehicles is from fuel stored 
in bunkers at the depots. This was 
calculated based on mileage of the 
fleet. For future years FCC will take 
over this service and will capture the 
amount of fuel used. Fuel use from 
mobile machinery was calculated based 
on estimates of fuel use for tools, 
lawnmowers and tractors.Investigate use of electric car between 
Tavistock and Totnes plus other 
businee routes1 Y Med Low Jan-20
Explore the use of electric vehicles for 
all fleet.1 Y High LowFeasibility study 
underway
Explore installing electric car charging 
points in car parks1 Y Med Low
Explore a rolling programme of 
electric/manual equipment to move 
away from petrol/generators.1 N Low Low 6 months
Explore a reduction in number of ‘cuts’ 
and promoting wild flowers etc.1 N Low High 6 months
1.3Process 
emissions0Waste collection is part of the Council’s 
obligations - those emissions are 
included within transport based 
emissions (2. Owned Transport). Waste 
processing is a function of upper tier 
authorities and so are out of scope for 
second tier authorities. There are no 
other process emissions.
1.4Fugitive 
emissions0Emissions due to leakage of refrigerant 
from air conditioning systems. Scope two
No. CategoryTonnes of CO2 
equivalent 2018/19Notes and information Supporting actions Influence Doing now Carbon saving Biodiversity savingImplementation 
time
5Consumption 
of purchased 
electricity, 
heat, steam 
and cooling290.9“Emissions associated with purchased 
electricity. This includes all owned 
buildings including leased out buildings 
as these are on an Operating Lease.  
 
Calculations undertaken based on 
metered electricity consumption. “Investigate procuring truly renewable 
energy1 N High Med 1 year
Explore installing low water delivery 
taps/plumbing to all our toilet facilities 
at Follaton House1 N Low Low 2 years
Investigate what energy efficient 
measures could be retro-fitted to 
Council properties1 N Med Med
Energy Efficiency – light fittings 
changed to LED 1 Y Med Med
Explore  renewable technology options 
– solar and air source heat pumps for 
example1 N High High
Aim for a Higher result in the energy 
performance certificates1 N Med Med On going
Scope three
No. CategoryTonnes of CO2 
equivalent 2018/19Notes and information Supporting actions Influence Doing now Carbon saving Biodiversity savingImplementation 
time
3.6Purchased 
material and 
fuel1515.1Embedded emissions of all purchased 
materials and fuels. Materials 
emissions were taken to be emissions 
associated with the purchase of goods. 
These were established by identifying 
the “top 10” contracts from the 
council’s procurement records and 
allocating these to a sector (within 
goods or services). Emissions were 
calculated using a conversion factor 
from ex E of Environmental Reporting 
Guidelines. Well to Tank (WTT) 
emissions from fuels and processes 
were calculated from all the other 
sections in the inventory with the 
exception of sections 3, 4, 8, 9 and 10.See Scope 2 re Renewable Energy 
procurement1 N High Low
Divest from fossil fuels and invest in 
renewable energy projects1 N High High 2 years
Explore forming a non-profit green 
energy company 1 N High High 5 years
Encourage residents to sign up to 
paperless billing and communication to 
reduce paper waste4 N Low Low
Adopt a sustainable procurement 
policy2 Y High Med 1 year
Work with top 10 suppliers to explore 
their approach to carbon reduction3 n High Med 3 yearsNo. CategoryTonnes of CO2 
equivalent 2018/19Notes and information Supporting actions Influence Doing now Carbon saving Biodiversity savingImplementation 
time
3.7Transport 
related 
activities305.7“Emissions from grey fleet, business 
travel and commuting: 
Grey fleet: Based on mileage at 45p/
mile 
Business travel (road/rail/air): Based on 
spend on train/plane/taxi. 
Commuting: Based on provided 
distances from employee to office, 
assumed number of journeys (260 for 
full time), split of full time to part time, 
and assume average car unknown fuel. 
Councillor mileage: Based on supplied 
annual mileage and assume unknown 
car size and fuel.”Introduce culture of agile working, 
working from home & skype meeting 
to reduce unnecessary travel1 Y High High Ongoing
Introduce business train booking 
account to encourage journeys by rail1 Y High High Ongoing
Introduce a car sharing scheme 
publishing on the intranet the intended 
journey and times1 N Med Med 2 months
Introduce a company scheme 
incentivising the purchase of electric 
cars1 N Med Med 6 months
Use of electric car between KP & FH 2 N Med Med 1 year
Provide new electric charging points 2 N High High
Encourage car sharing by paying 5p per 
mile if sharing on a business journey3 Y Med Med Ongoing
Explore changing the criteria for 
essential car user allowance, remove 
minimum mileage requirement and 
don’t reimburse between FH&KP3 Y High High Ongoing
Investigate electric bikes for some 
facility servicing. For example, toilet 
cleaners. This would require having 
supplies and cleaning kit at each 
locality.1 N Low Low 2 years
Fleet forward plan to include a trial use 
of electric vehicles for GM/MLO/CEO’s.2 N High High
Reduce business mileage by greater 
use of technology to reduce need to 
attend meetings1 N Med Med
Reduce business mileage by 
encouraging customer self-service and 
reduce need for officer/customer to 
travel1 N Med Med
Further encourage and incentivise 
alternative modes of travel e.g. use of 
rail, public transport1 N Med Med
Encourage/incentivise greater use of 
cycles for commuting1 N Low Low
Identify individual commute and 
business usage and set reduced targets1 N Med MedScope three - continuedNo. CategoryTonnes of CO2 
equivalent 2018/19Notes and information Supporting actions Influence Doing now Carbon saving Biodiversity savingImplementation 
time
3.8Waste 
disposal0Emissions associated with disposal of 
the Council’s own waste e.g. from its 
offices (as opposed to waste produced 
by constituents). No data was 
available, though from past projects it 
is expected that this would be a very 
small number in the context of the 
overall footprint.
3.9Leased 
assets and 
franchising, 
outsourcing2617.2This covers all emissions from 
outsourced services. Emissions from 
energy use at the leisure centres 
(based on metered fuel consumption 
data) was calculated in the same 
manner as for categories 1 and 5. 
Emissions from procured services were 
calculated in the same manner as for 
goods in category 6. As the contract 
for the leisure centres was already 
included in the procurement spend, 
only the balance of emissions from 
procured services were added.Investigate what energy efficient 
measures could be retro-fitted to 
leased properties1 N Med Med 2 years
Explore renewable options options 
for car parks, landholdings, public 
open space, tenanted and commercial 
property1 N Med Med
Meet with Fusion to determine 
renewable options for leisure centres2 N High Med 5 years
Tenanted property/commercial units 
- no heating installed  but EPC is now 
necessary in some cases - explore 
options3 Y High Med Ongoing
Electric charging points in industrial 
estates4 N High High 6 months
Green messaging in tenants handbook 
– encourage tenants to buy green  
energy4 N High Med 6 months
3.10Sold goods 
and services0Emissions from any sold goods or 
services. The Council state that no 
additional sold goods or services have 
been identified.Scope three - continued
OURWORLD
OURCOUNTY
OUR
COUNCIL