Climate
ChangeStrategic
DevelopmentFrameworkClimate
ChangeStrategic
DevelopmentFramework
Forward
“Climate change is a huge issue which impacts all of us, both now and in the future. It 
is crucial that we take steps now to tackle climate change and its effects, so we can all look forward to a greener future for the county.
“Since declaring a climate change emergency in 2019, we have made a firm commitment 
to achieve net zero carbon emissions by 2050. This means not only working with our 
own staff to identify how we can achieve this, but also supporting our partners and 
communities to do their bit towards a greener future too.
“This framework builds on the work we have done so far, and sets out how we will 
achieve net zero carbon emissions by 2050”. 
“Everyone can play their part in reducing our carbon emissions. This will take years, not 
months, but I am confident that with all of our services taking action, and through our 
work with partners and the wider community, we will be able to reach this target.”
County Councillor
Julia Jessel
Cabinet Member for Environment, 
Infrastructure and Climate Change
Context & background
A 2018 report produced by The United 
Nations Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change found that to limit global 
warming to 1.5 ºC above pre-industrial levels, nations need to achieve net zero carbon emissions by around 2050.
In 2019, the UK became the first major 
economy to pass a law requiring the UK to bring all greenhouse gas emissions to net-
zero by 2050. This means that the country 
needs to remove as much carbon from the atmosphere as it emits.
Following this, Staffordshire County Council 
members declared a Climate Change Emergency and made the commitment to 
achieve net zero carbon emissions by 2050.An All-Member Working Group was 
established to develop a list of actions and 
a Cabinet role, with specific responsibility 
for Climate Change, was appointed in July 2020. An annual action plan has been put 
in place identifying key priorities for action. 
By initially focussing on an action plan 
important issues can be tackled in a timely 
way as well as provide a strong foundation for the Strategic Framework. This Strategic 
Framework will build on previous strategies 
Hard Rain 1 (2005) and Hard Rain 2 (2007) and more recently Green Shoots in 2011, 
which contributed to substantial carbon 
emissions savings, through projects such as building energy effciency,  LED street 
lighting and a substantial reduction in staff 
mileage. 
Staffordshire County Council
Climate Change Vision
Staffordshire County Council will achieve net zero carbon 
emissions by 2050. In doing this we will enhance the quality of life and well-being for our residents and provide a sustainable economy for businesses. 
Staffordshire’s 
climate change risks
For Staffordshire, climate change is likely 
to mean warmer wetter winters and 
hotter drier summers with more extreme 
weather events such as greater flooding and heatwaves. These changes are already being experienced, for example, in just 
12 months between September 2019 – 
September 2020 the Council completed 70 formal flood investigations (an investigation being generally where 5 or more properties flooded internally). The previous five years no more than 5 investigations were 
required in this period. 
Each year the Council monitors its carbon 
emissions.  Buildings, waste and transport 
are the highest emitters and reducing 
emissions from these areas are high priorities, which are highlighted in our Climate Change Action Plan.  
Staffordshire County Council Carbon Emissions by Area of Operation 
from the 2018/2019 Financial Year
Building - Gas 
Consumption 17%
Waste Handling (Operations, Electricity & Transportation 24%LPGconsumption 0.1%Home to SchoolTransport 18%
Water Supply& Treatment 0.1%Heating Oilconsumption 1%
Building - Electricity
consumption 15%
Staff Travel 3% Electricity - Street 
Lighting &ITSEquipment 18%Amey (Highways)
Fuel 4%
We want to reduce our carbon emissions as 
much as possible, although we recognise 
that several of our services will continue 
to produce some emissions.  To achieve our 
net zero vision, we will investigate options for carbon sequestration (removing carbon from our atmosphere by, for example, 
planting more trees) where the carbon emissions cannot be reasonably reduced 
any further.
To achieve a resilient county, we not only
need to look at ways to reduce carbon 
emissions, but also to adapt to the 
changing climate.  We will identify ways to better prepare for the changing climate and extreme weather events. Key principles to
achieving net zero
 ■  Ensure all council services 
understand the need to 
reduce our carbon emissions 
and are committed to
  doin g so.
 ■  Be innovative, aspirational 
and positive leading by example.
 ■  Be positive in our approach, 
embrace opportunities and build on our successes. ■  Empower our staff and members to suggest 
solutions and commit to 
delivering the net zero 
target.
 ■  Have transparent processes 
and make the best use of the 
resources we have.
Priority themes
We have set out five delivery themes to deliver our vision. As our zero carbon journey 
progresses, more priorities may be identified to allow us to achieve our net zero vision.
Organisational Carbon Reduction
Reduce the carbon Impact of our services
- Reduce building energy usage
- Reduce vehicle emissions- Reduce our overall carbon impact- Increase utilisation of renewable
   energy
Air Quality
Improve the health of individualsthrough improved air quality
- Increase sustainable travel
- Reduce travel by fossil fuel vehicles- Improve infrastructure for more 
   sustainable travel
Natural
Environment
- Flood prevention/mitigation
- Adapt to climate change
- Carbon sequestrationBehaviour Change
- Enabling understanding of 
   climate change
- Empowering positive
   service provision
- Be more efﬁcient in 
   the energy we useWaste
- Take action to reduce waste             
  generation
- Re-use items where possible- Improve local recycling    
 infrastructure
SCC
Carbon
Reduction
Opportunities and 
levels of influence
All services will need to play a significant 
role to achieve the net zero vision. It will 
require leadership at multiple levels, new 
ways of thinking and the ability of decision makers to connect with others, working towards joint solutions. 
To achieve the vision, we will prioritise the 
carbon emissions which the council has direct control over and the greatest degree 
of influence. The county council can have varying 
influence over other carbon emissions 
that occur within the council area.  We 
therefore want to work with our partners and the wider community, to ensure we are considering all the areas we can influence 
to get a truly countywide approach to 
reducing carbon emissions.
Areas we 
directly
control/guideAreas we
can enable
through fundingAreas we
can enable
through policyAreas we can
inﬂuence locallyAreas we can inﬂuence
or ask for nationally
Our approach to delivery
Our vision cannot be achieved through 
one decision or investment. Change will 
be required over a number of years and 
requires us to be flexible so we can respond 
to new opportunities. All our services will take action and we 
will work with partners where possible 
to reduce Staffordshire’s wider carbon 
emissions. 
Working internally
we will:
■  Ensure our approach is based firmly 
on facts and figures, especially the 
annual carbon emissions reporting. 
■  Prioritise where to focus our efforts 
on activities where we have the 
most effective control or influence.
■  Make sure all internal strategies and 
policies reflect our climate change 
vision
■  Ensure that our actions follow 
consultation and agreement with 
elected members ■  Make sure our outwardly focussed 
strategies reflect the vision, and 
encourage our partners and 
communities to do the same 
wherever possible 
■  Ensure any potential impacts on 
climate and the environment are 
considered and reflected in our 
decision making and reporting
Working with partners and our community
we will:
■  Seek out opportunities to work with 
partners and the local community to 
encourage the climate change agenda, 
and support any local improvements.■  Give people the skills they need to drive 
the climate change agenda forward. 
■  We will encourage and support the 
transition of the Green Economy within 
Staffordshire.
Reviewing our progress
Carbon Emission s will be mon itored each year  to track our p rogress to net  zero and be 
used to inform the an nual climate change  action plan.  O ur performanc e, achieveme nts 
and areas for improvement will be summarised each year through an annual report.
These annual reports will also highlight the ongoing work across Staffordshire to reduce 
carbon emissions.
Plans, performance and  strategies will be regularly  reviewed as we monitor progre ss and 
as new technology and innova tive ideas are identified.
Sign off:
Date: 17.02.2021
