STOCKPORT
Climate action nowCan
Never put off until tomorrow, what we can do today 
Stockport Climate Change StrategyThe Stockport commitment
Carbon Neutral  
by 2038
2Contents
31  Introduction - The need to act  4
2 Background  7
3 What is a Carbon Footprint  8
4 Stockport Picture  10
5 Our residents have told us this is important  14
6 We are already taking action  15
7 We have to work together  16
8 Workstreams  18
a.  Council CAN  19
b.  Sustainable Financial Appraisal  20
c.  Climate friendly Borough  21
d.  Low Carbon Buildings  22
e.  Renewable Energy  25
f.  Sustainable Transport  26
g.  Natural Environment  28
9 Reporting on Progress  301. Introduction - The need to act
41.
The need  
to act
Globally, we recognise that climate change poses 
an unprecedented threat to our society. In many ways this is a decisive decade, where we have the knowledge and the emerging technology to take greater action.
Coronavirus has shown us that change is 
possible when everyone plays their part. As the pandemic progressed everyone made changes that were previously unthinkable. More of us are working from home than ever before, people are spending more time in their local communities and enjoying their greenspaces. These are all positive changes that benefit our society and the environment, and examples of what everyone can do to play their part. 
Much more is needed to be done. For 
this decade to be truly decisive, for climate change to really be resolved, it requires action at every level, from national governments right down to the individuals those governments serve. Not doing our part means locking in changes to the climate that will severely impact the lives of everyone in the borough.
Locally we have already felt disruption 
through severe flooding and these events are likely to become more frequent and severe with climate change posing a significant economic, social and environmental threat. This will also have an impact on wildlife and biodiversity, resulting in loss of species.As a Council we have already started to act by leading the way in recycling, embarking on an ambitious LED street lightning programme that will reduce energy demand by 33% and Stockport Homes are recognised as a leader in sustainability.
We are also working with colleagues 
across Greater Manchester to deliver the 5-Year Environment Plan which sets out our long-term environmental vision and the urgent actions we all need to take in the next 5 years to help achieve this.
However, we recognise that more is 
needed. The action required is far greater than the Council can deliver on its own, it needs national government legislation and investment alongside all of us changing our behaviour. It means working together with public sector partners, businesses and residents.
This strategy sets out the initial actions 
that Stockport Council will take to make a difference on climate change over the next five years as we begin our journey to net- zero 2038. As we move forward, we will continue to build upon the foundation we lay here, refining and reviewing to adapt our plan as time goes on.The scale of 
the challenge is 
significant, but we believe that Stockport CAN
51. Introduction - The need to act
A decisive 
decade
Temp Rise W
ater Health Land Environment
2°C20-30%  
decrease in water 
availability60 million more 
people exposed to 
malaria in Africa10 million more 
people affected by 
flooding each year40% of species  
facing extinction
4°C50
% decrease in 
water availability80 million more 
people exposed to 
malaria in Africa300 million more 
people affected by 
flooding each yearLoss of around 
half Arctic tundra 
and collapse of 
Amazon rainforest
5°CDisappearance 
of glaciers in 
Himalayas 
affecting China
/ 
IndiaDisease mutate 
and spread, water 
borne diseases 
increaseSea level rise 
threatens coastal 
areas and major 
world citiesRising risk of 
collapse of West 
Antarctica Ice 
Sheet
Impacts of Climate Change:   
This shows the impacts of a 2 degree increase in average global temperatures
Wildfires destroy areas of the 
natural environment in Australia
62. Background2.
Background
In March 2019, we declared a Climate Emergency 
and agreed our ambition to become carbon neutral by 2038. This was a cross-party agreement, empowering us to do our part to combat climate change. It recognised that:
 The impacts of global temperature 
rises above 1.5°C are so severe that governments at all levels must work together to make this their top priority;
 As well as large-scale improvements 
in health and wellbeing around the world, bold climate action can deliver economic benefits in terms of new jobs, economic savings and market opportunities;
 As urban populations rise, greater 
consideration of how urban systems can develop sustainably will be required.Globally, the 2016 Paris Agreement marked a milestone in global climate change efforts, as countries across the world joined together and agreed to new measures to tackle climate change, and to report on those efforts in a spirit of transparency.
In line with climate science, the agreement 
aims to limit the increase in global average temperatures to 1.5°C, by rapidly reducing the amount of greenhouse gases that are released into the atmosphere. The scientific consensus is that a failure to limit warming to 1.5°C will result in an increase in droughts, water shortages, the loss of coastal lands and the decline of fresh water supplies – to name just a few. The effects will be felt at every level: global, national and local – and it is at every level that we need to act.
The damage caused by Cyclone 
Idai in Southern Africa73. What is a Carbon Footprint
3.
What is  
a carbon footprint
Knowing our carbon footprint helps us 
understand the impact our lives are making.
The WWF has an website  
(footprint.wwf.org.uk) where you can calculate your own carbon footprint. It then shows you how much you are using compared to your share of the world average: if you are using more than 100% then either we need a bigger planet, or you are using more than your share. What is a Carbon Footprint?
‘Carbon footprint’ is a shorthand way of 
describing the full climate change impact of something by calculating its CO2 emissions. It includes production and freight costs, and it allows us to make comparisons between very disparate things – e.g. riding a bike versus eating a banana.
They are usually described in terms of CO2 
equivalence, as the different greenhouse gases all have different impacts on the climate – some are much more damaging than carbon dioxide. To calculate the carbon footprint of a country, we need to include not only what we produce and create ourselves, but also what we import. Often goods we import will have a bigger carbon footprint than goods we produce, especially if they are imported from countries that rely heavily on fossil fuels for energy.
Average carbon footprint  
for a UK citizen
10 tonnes
per year4 tonne sTarget for 2 020 to limit 
warming to 2 degrees
per year
8The Carbon Footprints  
of some common items
0.14g 
A pint of 
tap water 10g 
A plastic bag 80g 
A banana
80g 
A paper bag160g 
500ml  bottled water 500g 
6 minute shower
0.7kg 
A load of laundry (line dried)2.04kg 
A load of laundry (tumble dried)2.5kg 
A cheese burger
3.5kg  
5 miles  by car6kg 
Jeans22kg 
5 miles by car in congestion
0.5 tonnes 
Return flight, Manchester to Madrid4.6 tonnes 
Return flight, Manchester to Hong Kong
4.8 tonnes 
per year 
5 miles commute to work 
each way in rush hour
94. Stockport Picture
4.
Stockport 
Picture
To meet our commitment, we commissioned 
research to understand Stockport’s carbon emissions profile. This is a mathematical process that calculates how much carbon dioxide is put into the atmosphere.
This research was done using Tyndall 
Centre data and a SCATTER (Setting City Area Targets and Trajectories for Emissions Reductions) model.
The SCATTER graph overleaf demonstrates 
how Stockport’s carbon budget can be spent over the next 18 years to enable us to meet our target to become carbon neutral by 2038. Crucially, the graph shows that large scale change needs to happen now. There are many pathways to carbon neutrality, and they all depend on what we do within the sectors within our control, the ‘levers’ we can use to reduce our carbon emissions. By being bold in every sphere of our influence – both direct and indirect – we can meet these goals.But Stockport is not just the Council. It is its people, its communities and its businesses. The research shows that the Council makes up just 5% of Stockport’s carbon emissions. But every agreement – the Paris Agreement, the Climate Change Act and our Climate Emergency – needs action from the 100%. We all have our part to play.
10We all have  
our part  
to play
11Current 
Emissions Profile Summary
Figure 1:
SCATTER sector inventory for direct and  
indirect emissions within Stockport 2017
 Total Buildings (66%)
 Transport (30%)
 Waste (4%)
 Industrial Processes and Product Use (<1%)
Total: 1,234 ktC02eT ransport
(30%)
376 k tC02
Total Buildings
(66%)
815 ktC02
Total: 1,205 ktC02eDomestic
(39%)
467ktC02Industry and
Commercial 
(25%)
304 ktCO2Transport
(36%)
436 ktCO2Total: 1,234 ktC02eOn-road -
transport
(30%)
370 ktC02Residential
buildings
(40%)
496ktC02
Institutional
buildings &
facilities
(13%)
162ktC02Total: 1,234ktC02e
Figure 2:
SCATTER sub-sector inventory for direct and indirect emissions within Stockport 2017
 Residential Buildings (40%)
 Institutional buildings & 
facilities (13%)
 On-Road Transport (30%)
 Waterborne navigation (<1%)
 Wastewater (1%)
 Industrial product use (<1%) Commercial buildings 
facilities (4%)
 Industrial buildings & 
facilities (8%)
 Rail (<1%)
 Solid waste disposal (2%)
 Industrial process (<1%)Total:
 1,234ktC02e
Figure 3:
BEIS sector inventory for direct and indirect emissions with Stockport 2017
 Industry and Commercial (25%)
 Domestic (39%)
 Transport (36%)Total:
 1,205ktC02e
12Future 
Emissions Profile
Figure 4:
Stockport Carbon Budget and Pathways for 
the District-Wide Energy System annotated
2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 20500.20.40.60.812
1.21.41.61.8
Historic emissions Tyndall Paris-aligned
carbon budget BEIS/SCATTER Overlap: The SCATTER model base year is 2015*. More recent data has since been published by BEIS (black dotted line), enabling comparison (shaped region).
SCATTER Level 1: Assumes minimal action beyond current, national policy (where sufficiently defined by sector or measure) nationally led decarbonisation of the electricity grid. This will require a significant level of effort today.
SCATTER Level 4: Assumes that the region goes significantly beyond national policy and grid decarbonisation across both energy demand measures. This does not include any use of CCS technology.
Tynadall Paris Aligned Pathway: Unlike the SCATTER pathways, this is based on climate science, not tangible energy supply and demand measures within the region. This Pathway is one way of allocating a finite, carbon budget (the area underneath, Alternatively, the same budget would last 7 years at current emissions levels.
GMCA target data for Carbon Neutrality
44%  reduction  
against 2017 levels
86%  reduction against 
2017 levels
97% reduction against 
2017 levelsMtCO2e
Date (Year)
*Local Authority emissions & energy consumption data is published 2 years in 
arrears. SCATTER Tool operates from 2015 Base year, with adjustments made using 
2016 & 2017 BEISH Local Authority Emissions data135. Our residents have told us this is important
145.
Our residents 
have told us  this is important
We know this is important to the people  
of Stockport, especially young people.
In 2019, 7,662 young people from Stockport took 
part in the Make Your Mark ballot and of these, 4,127 said that the biggest priority was to protect the environment. The Make Your Mark ballot is supported by Local Authorities, schools, UK Parliament, Fledglink and the Department for Digital, Culture, Media & Sport. It gives young people across the country a say on what is to be debated on the green benches of the House of Commons by Members of Youth Parliament.
Young people from all over the UK came together to 
organise the first Youth Environmental Conference to be held in the UK. The event was hosted by Manchester Metropolitan University and took place during November 2019 and 20 schools from Stockport took part.
During 2020 we are engaging our communities 
through our One Stockport movement. We want  to know what is important to the people of Stockport as we build back better. We have heard feedback from children and young people both through our One Stockport engagement but also through our Stockport Conversation earlier in the year, and we know that tackling climate change is high on their agenda.We believe that we have 
a responsibility to protect 
the environment from the effects of climate change for the next generation; and that the Government should look towards carbon neutral alternatives.
UKYouthParliament.org.uk6.
We are already 
taking action
Across the borough, we are already  
acting on tackling the climate crisis.
The journey so far...6. We are already taking action
Stockport Homes are 
recognised as leaders  
in sustainability
Currently 91% of Stockport 
Homes housing stock is at EPC rating C or above compared to the borough average of 70% D or below
Stockport Council have 
commenced a £20 million LED Lighting and Energy Efficiency project for its street lighting network which aims to reduce the associated energy demand by 33%
Stockport Council are leaders  
in recycling, consistently  recycling circa 60%
We are in the process of  
planting 2,200 trees across  the boroughRenewable  
Energy
Stockport Hydro has been 
operational since 2012 and generates enough clean  energy to power 60 homes
We have already installed  
2,300 solar PV as well as  biomass heating on  2,100 homes
Sustainable  
Travel
Unprecedented investment  
in walking and cycling  schemes through the Mayoral Corporation Fund (MCF)
We have introduced electric 
charging points within the borough and electric vehicles into our fleet.
c
157. We have to work together
7.
We have to  
work together
This strategy sets out Stockport Council’s  
commitment to playing our part in achieving  
our climate ambitions.
We know they will be challenging so we will need to work closely with all residents, businesses, partners and government to achieve them. We know we can’t act alone to make the kind of impact that is needed immediately, so we will seek to play a leading role within GMCA and alongside other councils and to collectively lobby to ensure we are supported and enabled by the right UK Government policies. Legislative change and investment are needed at a national level to make a real difference.
The pie chart demonstrates that emissions directly 
related to Council activities typically represent less than 5% of the total emissions of the borough, therefore we have an important role in stimulating and influencing action in the borough.
However, we will provide credibility by leading by 
example, delivering our services in a green manner and helping to shape the market. We also want to put people at the heart of our action plan and will continue to work with our public sector partners, businesses and local communities so that everyone can play their part in reducing carbon.
95%5%
 C ouncil Emissions
 Borough- wide Emissions
16STOCKPORT
Climate action nowCan
Stockport CAN is not only 
the name of our strategy, 
it is a call to action – it recognises that while we will be ambitious leaders in addressing the climate challenge, we know we cannot do this alone.Throughout this strategy we recognise that it is a collective effort:
 Stockpor t Business CAN
 Stockpor t Residents CAN
 Stockpor t Communities CAN
 Stockpor t Schools CAN
 Stockpor t Council CAN
178. Workstreams
8.
Workstreams
7Our action plan consists of 
seven priority workstreams:
A.  Stockport Council CAN   
Leading the way by building climate action into everything we do
B.  Sustainable Financial Appraisal  
We’re putting climate impact at the heart of everything 
we do by introducing a brand new model of financial 
appraisal which informs all decisions we make
C.  Climate Friendly Borough  
Working with businesses and local people to take action
D.  Low Carbon Buildings  
More energy efficient homes and buildings, now and in the future
E.  Re newable Energy   
Ensuring that the future energy needs of the borough 
can all be met in a sustainable way
F.  Sustainable Transport  
Moving to carbon-free transport options and increasing 
walking, cycling and use of public transport
G.  Natural Environment  
Protecting and enhancing our natural environment
We have an underpinning action plan that 
provides more detail on each strand.
18A. Council CAN
Leading the way to build climate 
action into everything we do.
To make a difference we need to put 
Climate Change at the heart of everything we do and make it a core part of strategy development and decision making. We need to change the way we behave and lead by example. This is a supporting theme that runs across everything we do. Ultimately it means changing our individual behaviour alongside systems and processes.
We have already begun to make progress
 An all-party Climate Emergency Task 
Group has been established following the Council declaring a Climate Emergency.
 W e have already achieved official 
recognition as a bronze carbon literate organisation with 120 members of staff 
Carbon Literacy Trained including the 
Senior Leadership Team.
 W e commission our electricity from a 
green energy supplier.
 Stockpor t Homes has designed and 
developed an interactive environmental awareness course called ‘My Planet and Me’ which is delivered by Stockport Homes’ staff members to new starters. It is accredited to the carbon literacy standard but includes waste and biodiversity.Our Ambition
We will incorporate climate impact assessment into everything we do by incorporating it into decision making, report templates and all key strategies.
We will encourage our staff to change behaviour 
by reducing the resources they use such as energy, fuel and materials. For example, we will aim to reduce the amount of paper we use by 50% by 2025. To encourage behaviour change we will have measures such as carbon reduction competitions and Climate Action Days to promote awareness.
We will support our staff to be carbon literate  
by making carbon literacy training mandatory  by March 2021.
We will upgrade our staff travel plan that reduces 
the carbon in staff journeys by 20% by 2025.
We will use our role as a place shaper to invest in 
local markets and be transparent in our activity to encourage others.
198. Workstreams
B. Sustainable  
Financial Appraisal
Putting climate impact at the heart of 
everything we do by developing and adopting 
a brand new model of financial appraisal 
which informs all decisions we make.
We will put in place a new model of financial appraisal to make sure that climate impact is embedded into all investment decisions from 2021/2022 onwards. This work is leading the way in local government.
We have identified a gap to financial 
appraisals: there is currently a lack of prioritisation of business cases in relation  to carbon efficiency.
We have been working with Anthesis 
to develop an appraisal solution, which will provide us with an improved carbon evidence base for capital investment decisions and cross-departmental  climate action collaboration. We will completely change the way we undertake investments and put carbon at the heart  of everything we do. C onsideration for carbon emissions 
will become “business as usual” and therefore an integral part of how we  plan investments.
 The Capital Board will tak e a view of  
all investments so that we maximise Carbon reduction.
 W e’ll develop a programme that can bid 
for government grants and respond when external funds become available.
This work ultimately positions Stockport as the pioneer of internal carbon finance within Greater Manchester (GM), vital  for achieving the GM carbon net zero  goal of 2038.
Our Ambition
We will put in place a new model of financial appraisal for 2021/22 that will ensure that climate impact is embedded into decision making.
20C. Climate  
friendly Borough
Working with businesses and  
local people to take action.
To make a difference on climate change 
we need to encourage businesses and communities to work differently. We can play a key role in this by providing the conditions to facilitate and enable change within external organisations.
We know that there are many people in 
the borough, particularly young people that are passionate about climate change. We need to harness this energy to help people to make a difference. We also need to encourage individual behaviour change through education and advice.
We already have examples of where  
this has been developed:
 Stockpor t Local Fund –  £1m fund that 
community groups can apply for to help improve neighbourhoods.
 Stockpor t has risen 23 places in the 
Sustainable Growth Index which means  it is in the top 30% of local authorities in the UK.
 W e Love Stockport campaign includes a 
business awards scheme which aims to encourage businesses to address their impact on the local environment.
 Over 20 Stockport schools took part in a 
Climate Summit in November 2019.Our Ambition
We will develop a Stockport CAN (Climate Action Now) campaign, including social media, that provides information and advice to residents about action they can take.
We will continue to put children and young people 
at the heart of our approach utilising established forums and developing a climate change network.
We will ensure procurement policy considers carbon neutral considerations by March 2021 and run our own services through this test.
We will add climate action as a consideration 
within the Stockport Local Fund for 2020.
We will add climate action to our business 
development framework so that we will have supported 100 businesses to consider climate change by March 2021.
We will continue to grow the climate action 
business network and target businesses that  have the highest carbon footprint.
218. Workstreams
D. Low Carbon  
Buildings
More energy efficient homes and buildings, 
now and in the future.
The quality, design and use of homes 
and buildings across Stockport must be improved now to address the challenges of climate change. Doing so will also improve health, wellbeing and comfort, including for vulnerable groups such as the elderly and those living with chronic illnesses. 
Some of the things we have  
already done include:
 Stockpor t Homes are leaders in 
sustainable housing and have already installed 2,300 solar PV as well as biomass heating for 2,100 homes.
 W e’ve invested £32 million since 2008 on 
providing energy efficient homes.
 Currently , 91% of Stockport Homes 
stock is at EPC rating C or above with the average being rating C. This is significantly higher than the borough average (70% EPC D or below).
 W e’ve started a £20 million LED Lighting 
and Energy Efficiency project for its street lighting network which aims to reduce the associated energy demand by 33%. The estimated carbon savings based on this reduction in energy demand is 2,151 tCO
2.Our Ambition
We will reduce the carbon emissions for our Council services’ buildings by 10% by the end of 2021.
We will complete the replacement of street lamps 
with LED bulbs by 2023.
We will ensure that at least 40% of the Council 
housing stock will incorporate one or more renewable technologies by the end of 2021 (for example, solar PV).
We will work with Stockport Homes who are 
committed to delivering the Homes as Energy Systems project, which will see approximately 300 homes with improved ground source and air source heating within the next 24 months.
We will promote renewable and sustainable 
technology for newbuild and major renovations within our Local Plan by 2021, including encouraging PassivHaus developments.
We will produce an annual report on planning 
approvals detailing the carbon savings from developments that exceed government standards.
We will seek government funding and work with 
developers to deliver renewable technologies for the 3,500 homes built within the Mayoral Development Corporation urban neighbourhood.
We will promote opportunities such as the iChoosr 
solar initiative so that those that can afford to invest in their homes introduce renewable technologies.
We will work with GM colleagues to lobby 
government for funding and legislative change to deliver the scale of retrofitting needed in the private housing sector.
2223Stockport Hydro, Greater Manchester’s first 
community owned hydroelectric project
24E. Renewable Energy
Ensuring that the future energy  
needs of the borough can all be met  
in a sustainable way.
We understand that switching our 
appliances, lights and vehicles to electric is only as sustainable as the source of the electricity that powers these improvements. That’s why we plan to increase our sustainable energy supply, to ensure that the future energy needs of Stockport can all be met in a sustainable way, from smartphones to streetlights. We know we have a long way to go, and we will get there by stepping up our efforts, building on some of the sustainable energy projects already in Stockport, such as:
 W e have already improved our energy 
supply through the installation of solar PV, with 28 solar PV systems installed on our corporate estate and approximately 2,300 installed on homes.
 Stockpor t Hydro was Greater 
Manchester’s first community owned hydroelectric project. It has been operational since 2012 and generates enough clean energy to power 60 homes.
 A cross the borough, we have seen 
the installation of solar, heat pumps and biofuels in schools, churches and businesses, as well as supplying 2,100 homes with biomass heating.Our Ambition
We will seek government grants to maximise sustainable energy and heating systems into the Mayoral Development Corporation (MDC).
We will install large scale solar infrastructure in 
three locations within the borough should we be successful with our funding bid through the European Structural Investment Fund (ESIF).
We will introduce solar and battery storage 
infrastructure at our depots to enable us to transform our fleet to electric vehicles.
We will work with businesses and communities to 
promote sustainable energy and power.
258. Workstreams
F . Sustainable Transport
Moving to carbon-free transport options and 
increasing walking, cycling and use of public 
transport.
We all need to get around, and the ways we 
choose to travel, and the options available to us, are more important now than they ever have been. Transport is an issue that impacts everyone, whether you walk to your local shop, get the bus to school, or drive to work. We understand that transport is one of the biggest single contributors to climate change, with petrol and diesel cars playing a significant part. This is why we will be doing all we can to make alternative ways of getting around easier, such as encouraging active travel, promoting sustainable transport and improving infrastructure to make the switch to electric vehicles easier. All of this will be carried out in addition to our work with regional partners to continue to build upon the significant changes already taking place. Through schemes making it easier for staff to travel to work by bike, as well as being an early adopter of electric vehicles, we have been championing active and sustainable modes of travel for decades. We will continue to lead by example.Some of the things we have already achieved in this area include:
 Promoted sustainable transpor t 
including use of public transport and encouragement of walking and cycling.
 Introduced incentives for lower polluting 
vehicles by providing reduced permits for zero and low emission vehicles.
 W e have started to introduce electric  
fleet and currently have 3 zero emission vans, 4 electric vehicles and EV  recycling points.
 Our commitment to walking and c ycling 
has seen us introduce local park and stride groups as well as a walking and cycling forum that meets multiple times per year.
 W e consistently promote active  
travel for staff and residents.
26Our Ambition
We will continue to transform walking and cycling opportunities across 
the borough, encouraging people to take part in active travel.
We will develop 14 walking and cycling schemes to be delivered in 
the next two to three years with the unprecedented funding from the Mayoral Challenge Fund (MCF).
We will continue to improve our public transport, including the 
introduction of the Metrolink, creation of a new Cheadle train station, and improvements to bus services.
We will increase public maintained electric charging points up to 30 
by 2025 and ensure all new vehicles which form part of our fleet will be non-carbon within five years where technology allows.
We will consult residents on the introduction of a clean air zone.
278. Workstreams
G. Natural  
Environment
Protecting and enhancing  
our natural environment.
Our natural environment is one of the most 
important resources we have in Stockport. It provides space for wildlife, enhances the beauty of Stockport, and improves our mental health. We understand that our natural environment means many things, to many people, and that is why we won’t just protect our natural environment and biodiversity, we will enhance it.
But we can’t do this alone. To really 
safeguard our natural environment for future generations, we all need to play our part. The shops we buy from, the rubbish we throw out, and the way we treat our waste all impact the natural environment, locally and nationally. We know that individuals will have an important role to play here in reducing the amount of waste they create by buying fewer products and by buying products which last longer.
The phrase Reduce, Reuse, Recycle is often 
used when we talk about how to be more environmentally friendly and so we will encourage individuals to live sustainably through this model.
Together, we CAN  play our part.
 Stockport Council is supporting ‘Feeding 
Stockport’ which is funded by the Esmee Fairbairn Foundation through Sustainable Food Cities.
 We delivered the #GotToBeABottle campaign with Recycle for Greater Manchester to promote and improve recycling. The campaign aimed to make plastics recycling less confusing and provided every household in Stockport with a wheelie bin recycling guide.Refuse
Reduce
Reuse
Recycle
Recover
Dispose
Most preferable option
Least preferable option
28Our Ambition
We will plant at least 11,500 standard 
trees in parks and along the highway  
by 2030.
We will create one new woodland each 
year, for the next ten years, using up to 80,000 whips (young trees) in total. These woodlands will be created in partnership with community groups.
We will ensure that all developers  
are encouraged to include sustainable drainage and biodiversity net gain wherever possible as part of our planning policy.
We will continue to encourage 
recycling by promoting correct recycling practice and educating  our residents.We will  create areas managed for a 
grass meadow in every ward across the borough by 2025.
We will create an orchard in every 
ward across the borough by 2025/26, planting over 3,500 fruit trees by 2030.
We will reduce Council waste by  
at least 15% by 2025. Although we  are already successful, we will seek  to maintain and improve on our  efforts and encourage residents to  do the same.
299. Reporting on Progress
9.
Reporting  
On Progress
Next steps:
We’ll report our action plan to the following groups:
 Climate A ction Member Task Group  (This is a cross-party group of 
Elected Members)
 Climate A ction Steering Group  (Made up of Senior Managers and 
representing all areas of focus within this report)
 Annual Monitoring and Update repor t to Communities and Housing 
Scrutiny Committee
30Stockport 
Metropolitan 
Borough Council
Stockport Climate Emergency Strategy
Stockport Borough Plan
Stockport Council Plan
Stockport Local Plan
A.
Council 
Can
The Council’s actions  
to improve its own  
carbon footprint.B.
Financial 
Appraisal
Putting climate impact at 
the heart of everything 
we do by developing and 
adopting a brand new 
model of financial appraisal 
which informs all decisions 
we make.C.
Climate 
Friendly 
Borough
Actions taken by 
communities, 
businesses, residents 
and the Council to 
improve the Borough’s 
carbon footprint.
D.
Low Carbon 
Buildings
Key policy documents: 
Stockport Housing 
StrategyE.
Renewable 
Energy
Key policy documents: 
Stockport Climate  
Change and Energy  
Evidence StudyF.
Sustainable 
Transport
Key policy documents: 
Walking & Cycling  
StrategyG.
Natural 
Environment
Key policy documents: 
Town Centre Green  
Infrastructure Plan
31STOCKPORT
Climate action nowCan