Low Carbon  
FrameworkContents  
Foreword                                                                       3 
Introduction                                                                9 
Approach to reducing carbon                           11 
Context and background                                   15 
Carbon inventory in Sunderland                    19 
Carbon reduction targets,  
commitment and vision                                       21 
Strategic priorities and objectives               25 
Strategic Priority 1:  
Adapt our behaviour                                         29 
Strategic Priority 2:  
Adapt the policies and operational  
practices of our organisations                      31 
Strategic Priority 3:  
Create an energy efﬁcient built  
environment                                                         35 
Strategic Priority 4:  
Develop renewable energy generation  
and storage                                                          37 
Strategic Priority 5:  
Low carbon and active transport                 39 
Strategic Priority 6:  
Grow the city’s green economy                      41 
Strategic Priority 7:  
Reduce consumption and waste                  43 
Get involved                                                              46Sunderland Low Carbon Framework  
December 2020
Page 1Foreword  
Climate change remains the challenge of  
our generation. The World (and the UK) is  
heating up. Governments from all around  
the World (including the UK) acknowledge  
this and that urgent change is required.  
The UK Committee on Climate Change  
states that the ten warmest years on record  
in the UK have all occurred since 1990. The  
likelihood of experiencing a summer  
heatwave comparable to that experienced  
in 20181 in any particular year is now  
10–20%, double the likelihood of a few  
decades ago. Sea levels are rising, and  
rainfall patterns are changing. The impacts  
of climate change are accelerating, and  
public concern about climate change is  
increasing as our level of understanding  
increases (July 2019).2 
The 2018 UN (IPCC) report sets out that  
an average global rise in temperature of  
1.5°C above pre-industrial times would be  
an unacceptable risk. In truth, there is no  
safe level of global warming, and we have  
already seen a rise of 1°C, with each decade  
adding more than 0.2°C to that ﬁgure. This  
tells us that global action is needed now  
and efforts must be made  
to go faster and further in reducing  
emissions to keep us safe. This is the  
climate emergency.  
As a city Sunderland needs to act now to  
reduce direct and indirect carbon  
emissions. We need to prepare and adapt to  
deal with the projected impacts of climate  
change.  
This Low Carbon Framework is a call to  
action. We are calling on you, as people who  
live, work, visit and invest in Sunderland, to  
join with us on this exciting decade of  
transformation. This Framework gives the  
city clear focus and direction  
in our quest for signiﬁcant carbon  reduction and provides the strategy within  
which we can each take responsibility and  
work together.  
This Framework has been prepared by  
the 2030 Shadow Board, made up of  
partner organisations across Sunderland  
working together to achieve our collective  
vision and objectives. It is a high-level  
strategy that demonstrates the city’s  
commitment to reducing its carbon impact.  
It will need to evolve as global and national  
policy evolves, and as science continues to  
understand the impact of  
the changing environment.  
We will continue to monitor and assess our  
progress and reﬁne this Framework  
accordingly over time. Our work is partly  
about ensuring Sunderland plays its full  
part in limiting the impacts of climate  
change, ensuring that we help to keep  
global heating to well below 2°C. However, it  
is also about ensuring our communities can  
thrive and our businesses can prosper, and  
that we continue to draw people and  
businesses to the city to help build and  
share in our success.  
This Framework sets out the vision, purpose  
and direction of actions necessary to  
enable us, together with our residents and  
businesses, to deliver on these necessary  
goals. Collective sustainable action will help  
to ensure that Sunderland’s vision of  
becoming a dynamic, healthy and vibrant  
city is realised for all.  
This is the ﬁrst iteration of Sunderland’s Low  
Carbon Framework and it will be  
underpinned by a series of individual Action  
Plans developed by partners across the city.  
It is expected that the Framework will be  
reviewed and reﬁned following feedback  
and ongoing engagement, with our  
communities, businesses, residents and  
12018 was the joint hottest summer on record for the UK as a whole since records began in 1910 - https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-45399134
2 https://www.theccc.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2019/07/CCC-2019-Progress-in-preparing-for-climate-change.pdfSunderland Low Carbon Framework  
December 2020
Page 3partner organisations as required. Its  
success relies on a collaborative effort from  
organisations and individuals to decide how  
they will change their own activities to help  
achieve the city’s shared ambition to  
become carbon neutral. Sunderland Low Carbon Framework  
December 2020
Page 4 
Cllr Graeme Miller, Leader of Sunderland  
City Council said:  
“Climate change remains the challenge of  
our generation. Sunderland is committed to  
playing its part in tackling the global  
climate change emergency.  
As a city, we recognise that we need to act  
now to reduce direct and indirect carbon  
emissions. We need to prepare and adapt  
to deal with the projected impacts of  
climate change.  
This Low Carbon Framework sets out the  
vision and purpose to enable us, together  
with our residents and businesses, to deliver  
on these goals. Collective sustainable  
action will help to ensure that Sunderland’s  
vision of becoming a dynamic, healthy and  
vibrant city is realised for all.”  
 
Diane Carney, Director of Property at  
Gentoo Group, said:  
“Gentoo is fully committed in supporting  
Sunderland to reach its carbon reduction  
target and is investing heavily in low carbon  
initiatives, such as the pioneering Core 364  
project in Roker. Our pledge to reduce  
carbon emissions in the city sits alongside  
our ongoing commitment to minimise fuel  
poverty across our tenants and the city-
wide partnership approach to the Low  
Carbon Framework is key to the anchor  
organisations in Sunderland achieving  
shared goals.” 
Ken Bremner, Chief Executive of South  
Tyneside and Sunderland NHS Foundation  
Trust, said:  
“Reducing our carbon footprint is one of our  
key priorities and of signiﬁcant beneﬁt to  
our patients, staff and the communities that  
we serve. We are committed to creating a  
more eco-friendly environment across our  
Trust by focussing on how we can be more  
sustainable in our actions and investing in  
areas such as greener energy sources and  
electric vehicles.  
Working closely with our partners and  
stakeholders we can deliver more  
sustainable reductions in our carbon  
emissions and fully embrace our role as  
a responsible employer. We very much  
welcome and support a city-wide  
approach to carbon reduction through  
the Low Carbon Framework and the  
opportunity to work together and share  
experiences across Sunderland to help  
us achieve our goals.”  
 
James Ramsbotham CEO North East  
England Chamber of Commerce said:  
“Climate change is a global emergency,  
working with our members we will ensure  
that sustainability is at the heart of our  
recovery plans for the North East, helping to  
create new jobs and opportunities for the  
region. We commit to working collectively to  
deliver on our net zero commitments.’’  Sunderland Low Carbon Framework  
December 2020
Page 5 
Steve Knight, University of Sunderland’s  
Chief Operating Ofﬁcer, said:  
“ At the University of Sunderland we are  
committed to making a positive difference  
to society and this includes minimising our  
own climate-related impact. At the same  
time, we know that making a meaningful  
response to the climate emergency will  
require a collaborative effort.  
We welcome the opportunity to be a  
partner organisation in the City’s ambitious  
Low Carbon Framework and look forward to  
our staff and students working together  
with the wider community, to achieve our  
collective sustainability targets.”  
 
Dr Neil O’Brien, Chief Ofﬁcer, NHS  
Sunderland Clinical Commissioning Group  
(CCG) said:  
“Climate change brings new challenges,  
both in direct effects to our healthcare  
services, but also to patient health.  
Examples in recent years include heat  
waves, air pollution, prolonged periods of  
cold, ﬂoods and droughts.  
As an NHS organisation, and as a spender of  
public funds, NHS Sunderland CCG have an  
obligation to work in a way that has a positive  
effect on the communities we serve, which  
includes the efﬁcient use of natural resources  
to help build healthy, resilient communities.  
The CCG acknowledges its responsibility  
towards reducing our carbon emissions  
and creating health services that are  
environmentally sustainable in the future. To  
help achieve this, the CCG has created a  
Green Plan that informs our efforts to help  
reduce the overall carbon footprint of the NHS.  
We are proud to support the city-wide  
approach set out in the Low Carbon  
Framework so that collectively we can  
achieve more.” 
Simon Marshall, Director of Education at  
Together for Children said:  
“This Framework is about the next  
generation. It’s about driving change and  
empowering young people to be the focus  
of this change. We want to encourage  
leadership and foster a sense of ownership  
amongst young people, ensuring they have  
a strong voice throughout and are the  
leading force behind this agenda. We’re  
looking forward to continuing to work with  
partners, including engaging with the city’s  
schools, in 2021 and onwards to enable  
them to play a leading role in this effort.”  
 
Ellen Thinnesen OBE, CEO at Education  
Partnership North East, said:  
“Over the past year we have been very busy  
accelerating improvements to our carbon  
footprint and ensuring the college’s  
operations support a growing green  
agenda.  
“We are delighted to support this ambitious  
new Low Carbon Framework and intend to  
use it to raise awareness and bring about  
further positive change right across our  
North East college community.”  Sunderland Low Carbon Framework  
December 2020
Page 6Introduction  
Sunderland is committed to playing  
its part in tackling the global climate  
change emergency.  
Over the past decade we have responded  
to the climate change crisis and taken steps  
to reduce our carbon. However, as a city we  
still emit 1,436,600 tons of CO2 annually  
(based on 2017 Department for Business,  
Energy and Industrial Strategy data). We all  
need to act urgently to reduce our carbon  
emission to help in the global ﬁght to limit  
global temperature rise to below 1.5°C.  
The people of Sunderland are concerned  
about climate change. Many people are  
already taking action as individuals and  
communities, and they support changes to  
the city which would help them to reduce  
carbon emissions. However, the pace and  
scale of change for us to deliver our vision  
requires fundamental and radical changes  
to the way that we currently work as a city.  
We are proposing to embed climate  
change and carbon neutrality throughout  
our city. Moving forward to achieve our  
targets will require signiﬁcant investment  
of time, money and energy from the council,  
the government, partners and residents  
all working together. This is a shared  
challenge, and this Framework reﬂects our  
approach to realising this, acting with  
urgency as a city.  
This Framework has been prepared by  
Sunderland’s 2030 Shadow Board to set out  
our approach for Sunderland to reduce its  
carbon and achieve carbon neutrality. It  
sets out the direction of change for  
Sunderland and focuses attention on our  
seven strategic priorities.  
There may be many ways to achieve the  
outcomes we need. This Framework is not  
intended to plot a ﬁxed and deﬁnitive  
course to carbon neutrality but, as an  
evolving pathway, to incorporate new  
developments in technology and adapt to  the emerging climate science and carbon  
reduction process. It establishes a high-
level strategic framework for how we will  
play our part as a city in meeting the  
commitments under the Paris Agreement,  
and our commitments as a signatory of the  
EU Covenant of Mayors, UK100 Pledge, and  
through our declaration of a climate  
emergency.  
It has been shaped by scientiﬁc data to  
ensure it is in line with the commitments  
in the Paris Agreement and other  
national commitments.  
There are many areas where further detail  
or support from Government is required.  
However, given the urgency for action, we  
are choosing to drive this Framework  
forward now as a city partnership, based on  
what we already know we need to do, with  
further development work to follow on an  
ongoing basis. Sunderland Low Carbon Framework  
December 2020
Page 7Approach to  
reducing carbon  
Achieving our target to be carbon neutral  
won’t work through business-as-usual  
approaches. It will require us to work in  
different and new ways to ensure we remain  
agile and joined-up to effectively solve and  
tackle the issues we face.  
We recognise that achieving our vision will  
not be easy. There are entrenched market  
and wider forces that will support existing  
fossil-fuel dependent, consumption-based  
systems. We will need to show strong  
leadership to create opportunities for all to  
participate. We have an exciting  
opportunity to address the challenge of  
climate change whilst also delivering new  
homes, reducing inequalities, creating a city  
with enhanced green spaces, places for our  
children to play, cleaner air, jobs and  
opportunities for all.  
Working with partners  
We know that no individual or organisation  
can deliver the city’s carbon neutral  
commitment alone, and we must work  
together to enable everyone across the city  
to engage in a meaningful way and to  
understand the individual, collective and  
organisational changes that we must  
deliver together. This Framework can only  
be delivered if we all work together.  
We have been working across the city to  
establish a partnership-based approach  
drawing in other public sector  
organisations, businesses, residents and  
stakeholders to set out a collective  
understanding and vision. 2030 Shadow Board  
That is why Sunderland has set up a  
partnership board known as the 2030  
Shadow Board with representatives from  
across the city such as the NHS, University  
of Sunderland, College, NE Chamber of  
Commerce, Sunderland Youth Council as  
well as cross-party Elected Member  
representation from each Group on the  
Council. The 2030 Shadow Board’s purpose  
is to work collectively to drive forward  
Sunderland’s ambitions and commitment to  
tackling climate change.  
This Framework  
Our approach to reducing carbon  
emissions cannot be linear. We need to  
learn, identify our priorities and projects,  
engage, act and monitor to ensure we are  
reducing our carbon footprint and making  
progress towards our target and revise our  
approach as necessary. This is why we are  
doing things slightly differently to others.  
We don’t think it is appropriate to prepare a  
single document which could be left on a  
shelf, we want to embed low carbon into  
everything we do. That is why we have  
prepared this Framework to establish a  
high-level approach for Sunderland.  
As set out in chapter 1, this Framework  
establishes a high-level strategy for  
meeting our commitments under the Paris  
Agreement, EU Covenant of Mayors and our  
declaration of a climate emergency.  
It focuses activity around seven strategic  
priorities, putting people at its heart –  
changing our behaviours, changing our  
organisational practices, and setting out  
5 thematic areas for work to be taken  
forward including;  Sunderland Low Carbon Framework  
December 2020
Page 9•Creating an energy efﬁcient  
environment.  
•Developing renewable energy  
generation and storage.  
•Developing low carbon and active  
transport modes.  
•Growing the city’s green economy.  
•Reducing consumption and waste  
Action Plans  
Supporting this Framework will be a  
number of Action Plans. Rather than  
preparing one document which attempts  
to establish what everyone must do in the  
city to achieve our targets, each member  
of the 2030 Shadow Board Partnership has  
committed to prepare their own Action  
Plan. Each partner’s Action Plan will set  
out their organisation’s/body’s commitment  
to the Framework, their targets and the  
actions they intend to take to achieve  
Sunderland’s ambitions to become  
carbon neutral.  
The Action Plan presents each partner’s  
view of how their organisation can achieve  
its ambitions to be carbon neutral. They set  
out the actions that must taken to deliver  
our vision of carbon neutrality. The Action  
Plans are based on what we know today.  
There will be many other actions that will  
emerge over time that will need to be  
identiﬁed and progressed, and therefore  
there will be no such thing as a ‘ﬁnal  
version’ of the Action Plans. They will be in  
constant review as real world events  
happen and new technologies and delivery  
methods become available.  
Engagement and discussion  
Engagement is at the heart of this  
Framework. It is fundamental to achieving  
success. Taking people along with us in our  
journey of carbon neutrality will increase a  
sense of ownership and empowerment  
across the city. Initial engagement has already  
commenced and we have started the  
conversations but we still have a long way  
to go. We need to have an ongoing, open  
dialogue and engage with individuals,  
households, organisations and businesses  
over the coming months, years and decade.  
We need to engage to develop a shared  
understanding and language on what  
Carbon neutrality means for the city and  
a shared commitment to the actions that  
we need to take. The 2030 Shadow Board  
has prepared an Engagement Plan to help  
with this.  
Working with the Community  
We all have a role in the city’s planning,  
decision making and delivery of climate  
actions. We know that different people and  
community groups have different needs  
and ideas which can help shape our  
approach and actions.  
We need all of our communities to help  
create, shape and be part of the city’s  
transformation. Communities should be  
connected, feel empowered and able to  
inﬂuence the future of the city. Improving a  
community’s green space, for example,  
requires local residents to feel a sense of  
ownership and empowerment for it.  
Engagement with Businesses  
Working together with city and regional  
business forums and partners, we will  
engage with businesses operating in the  
city and further aﬁeld who have a unique  
and crucial role to play in helping achieve  
the city’s carbon neutral ambitions. We will  
engage and listen to businesses of all  
sectors and sizes to ensure we understand  
and can help them to respond to the  
challenges they face as well as to take  
advantage of the potential commercial and  
growth opportunities.  
Initial business surveys have been  
undertaken in order to start to obtain  
the views of businesses on current  
growth prospects. Sunderland Low Carbon Framework  
December 2020
Page 11Engagement with  
young people  
Engaging young people and students in  
climate change discussions is  
fundamentally important to ensuring that  
they understand how the world is changing  
and we learn from their insight.  
Our aim is to involve children, young people  
and students in initiatives which  
will help them to contribute to delivering  
carbon neutrality in Sunderland. We will  
do this by:  
•Engaging with the University and the  
Students’ Union.  
•Developing a School Programme with  
Together for Children.  
•Ensuring young people continue to be  
represented on the 2030 Shadow Board.  
Understanding Carbon Data  
The UK Government department BEIS  
(Department for Business, Energy &  
Industrial Strategy) annually release each  
summer local authority carbon emissions.  
The BEIS data reports what are known as  
Scope 1 and 2 carbon dioxide emissions at  
local authority level. These reports are the  
most relevant data to monitor our progress  
on a city scale.  
In order to deliver on our carbon neutral  
commitment, we must ensure we tackle  
emissions where they arise and we must  
deploy our limited resources to achieve the  
greatest carbon reduction impact. It is  
therefore essential that we have a full  
understanding of carbon datasets.  
We need to understand the nature and  
sources of the climate emissions at city  
level by using reliable baseline information  
in order to determine an appropriate scale  
and type of intervention. Whilst data is very  
important to our low carbon planning, we  
must not allow the absence of perfect data  
to prevent us taking action.  
We recognise that this is an area which will  
require further development over the  
coming months and years to create  meaningful Key Performance Indicators  
and an annual report. In some cases, the  
local structures and datasets are in place,  
but in some cases we will need to do further  
work to seek access to existing datasets,  
work with partners to develop new datasets  
and establish new monitoring programmes.  
Monitoring our success  
Action on climate change is a fast-moving  
agenda. It is likely there will be  
developments over the life of this  
Framework that will require it to be updated  
and we will do this as required.  
We will produce an annual report setting  
out the city’s progress. We will establish a  
system to enable Sunderland organisations  
and sectors to measure and report their  
performance according to a consistent  
methodology. This will also enable annual  
reporting and reviews for each Action Plan.  
Annual progress reports in relation to the  
Action Plans will set out the actions that  
have been delivered over the preceding  
year, conﬁrm whether the actions that  
are proposed over the coming years  
remain relevant.  
The annual reports, alongside BEIS data,  
will help establish if we need to update  
this Framework.  
Funding  
To achieve the transformational change set  
out in this Framework, we will need long-
term ﬁnancial resources. This Framework is  
ambitious and wide-ranging, but the extent  
of the actions we can take will be  
determined by the funding that we have  
available and Government support  
to enable carbon reduction. At this stage  
it is not known what scale of investment  
is required to deliver our target of  
carbon neutrality. Further work on this  
is progressing. Sunderland Low Carbon Framework  
December 2020
Page 12Context and  
background  
Global effects of  
climate change  
The earth is close to 1°C warmer than it was  
100 years ago and without action this could  
increase to 3°C, which will be catastrophic  
for our society and the natural world. As a  
result of climate change people in  
Sunderland can expect to experience rising  
sea levels, increased ﬂooding and increased  
extreme hot and cold spells which will affect  
human life.  
 
There is overwhelming evidence that  
the changes we are experiencing in  
our climate, predominantly in the form  
of global warming, are caused by  
human activity.  
The UN Conference of the Parties (COP)  
and 2015 Paris Climate Agreement (Paris  
Accord) recommend that all nations take a  
share of the responsibility and seek to  
reduce CO2 emissions urgently. Most  
importantly, major reductions need to occur  
within the next 10 years.  
Governments have agreed to take action to  
limit the global temperature rise to below  
2°C above pre-industrial levels and to  
pursue efforts to limit it even further to 1.5°C.  
The UK government has committed to  
reducing greenhouse gas emissions to net  
zero by 2050.  The Greenhouse Effect:  
When sunlight reaches the Earth, some  
of the energy is absorbed on the surface  
and re-radiated as infrared energy that  
we call heat.  
This goes back into the atmosphere  
where greenhouse gases, such as carbon  
dioxide ( CO2), trap this heat and send it  
back out in all directions. This natural  
process stops our planet being cold and  
is called the ‘Greenhouse Effect’.Human activity increasing  
the greenhouse effect:  
Human activities are impacting on the  
greenhouse effect, which in turn is  
contributing to the increase in the  
Earth’s temperature. The removal from  
the ground and burning of fossil fuels for  
electricity, heating and transport creates  
more greenhouse gas, particularly  
carbon dioxide, which is changing the  
balance of the Greenhouse Effect.  
The increase in these greenhouse gases,  
which can last from years to centuries in  
the atmosphere, trap even more heat  
and cause the planet to get hotter.  
These rising temperatures are now  
altering the global climate resulting in  
longer and hotter heat waves, more  
frequent droughts, heavier rainfall, rising  
sea levels and more powerful storms and  
hurricanes. This is seen in the retreat of  
glaciers, melting of ice, loss of habitats, as  
well as ﬂoods and ﬁres around the world. Sunderland Low Carbon Framework  
December 2020
Page 13In 2018, the Intergovernmental Panel on  
Climate Change (IPCC) published a report  
which advised that global warming must be  
limited to 1.5°C, as opposed to the previous  
target of 2°C. The IPCC’s review of over  
6,000 sources of evidence found that,  
with a rise of 1.5°C, there would be risks to  
health, livelihoods, food security, water  
supply, human security and economic  
growth. A rise to 2°C would be even more  
catastrophic. It warned that there are  
12 years to take the serious action required  
to avert this crisis and avoid the  
worst impacts.  
The UK Climate Change Act now legislates  
for a commitment to net zero greenhouse  
gas emissions by 2050. The 2019 amended  
UK Climate Change Act commits the UK to  
at least a 100% reduction in greenhouse gas  
emissions by 2050 from 1990 levels on the  
basis that the UK’s would become net zero’  
by this point. This is not the same as zero  
greenhouse gas emissions by 2050.  
 
 
Figure 1:Climate change  
in Sunderland  
Climate change will affect different people  
and places unevenly, and so is likely to lead  
to further inequalities globally as well as  
between people living in Sunderland and  
between current and future generations,  
so creating injustice. At a global level, this is  
in part why different emissions reduction  
targets are set between developed and  
developing nations, through climate change  
negotiations. At a local level, we need to  
ensure that our actions achieve ‘climate  
justice’ and enable beneﬁts to be achieved  
and felt by all the city’s residents.  
The local effects of a changing climate  
are already apparent. Extreme weather  
events may affect the city independently of  
climate change, but climate change is  
increasing their likelihood. The growing  
severity and frequency of extreme  
weather events is being fuelled by climate  
change from the emissions already  
released to the atmosphere.  
In Sunderland, through climate change, we  
can expect:  
•an increase in extent, depth and  
frequency of ﬂooding within the city  
from surface water, rivers and the sea  
due to sea level rise, storm surges and  
increasing intensity of rainfall;  
•hotter summers, which will also lead to  
increased heat stress, particularly on  
vulnerable members of the community  
such as the elderly, as well as increased  
energy consumption for cooling;  
•colder winters which will not only  
increase demand on our energy supplies  
for heating, but will also impact on our  
most vulnerable residents;  
•disruption to transport and power  
networks through weather events,  
and increased repair costs to ﬁx  
damaged infrastructure;Feedback loops:  
Increasing temperatures result in an  
increase in melting ice and permafrost,  
and an increasing number of global ﬁres,  
all of which contribute to further  
greenhouse gas releases.  
As these processes escalate, they help to  
warm the planet up quicker. These  
spiralling effects are often referred to as  
‘feedback loops’.
Sunderland Low Carbon Framework  
December 2020
Page 15•increased health issues such as skin  
cancer and cataracts caused by extra  
sunlight, and respiratory problems  
associated with trafﬁc pollution;  
•the global economy to be affected, and  
certain products (like food) may become  
more expensive which would affect  
Sunderland residents on the lowest  
household incomes.  
These impacts will affect individuals’ health,  
safety and well-being, affect homes,  
buildings and transport infrastructure,  
impact on service delivery and create new  
forms of demand upon  
our resources.Sunderland Low Carbon Framework  
December 2020
Page 16Carbon inventory  
in Sunderland  
Where does our carbon  
come from?  
Sunderland’s carbon emissions primarily  
stem from:  
•industrial and commercial emissions;  
•domestic emissions; and  
•transport emissions.  
Sunderland has reduced its carbon  
emissions by 28% from 1,992,900 tonnes of  
CO2 in 2005 to 1,436,600 tonnes in 2017.  
Domestic emissions savings have been  
highest (37%), whilst transport emissions  
has reduced by 13% (see Figure 2, below).  
Figure 2 shows a more detailed breakdown  
of emissions in 2017. It demonstrates that:  
•Road transport accounts for virtually all  
the city’s carbon transport emissions;  
•Three times more carbon emissions  
arise from domestic gas as opposed to  
domestic electricity;  
•Industrial emissions account for 40% of  
total carbon emissions, while agriculture  
accounts for 0.1%. The main sources of CO2 emissions that  
Sunderland is responsible for, or which we  
have inﬂuence over, are as follows:  
•Direct (energy-related) CO2 emissions:  
from homes, workplaces and ground  
transport activities inside the city.  
•Indirect/consumption-based CO2 
emissions: from the things that we buy  
and ultimately dispose of, for example,  
food, clothes, phones, electrical  
equipment, furniture, construction  
materials, many of which are produced  
outside of the city. Sunderland Low Carbon Framework  
December 2020
Page 17Carbon  
reduction targets,  
commitment  
and vision  
To meet the Paris Agreement objective  
there is a limited amount of CO2 we can  
emit globally. Climate change scientists  
refer to this as the global ‘carbon budget’.  
A carbon budget provides an indication of  
the maximum total amount of carbon  
dioxide that can be emitted to the  
atmosphere through human actions,  
between 2020 and 2100, to be in line with  keeping global temperature rise well below  
2°C and pursuing efforts to limit to 1.5°C rise  
by the end of the century. A carbon budget  
is needed to ensure that global CO2  
emissions do not collectively go beyond the  
level that would increase the risk of global  
temperatures reaching dangerous levels.  
Sunderland must abide by its carbon  
budget and ensure that its emissions fall  Sunderland Low Carbon Framework  
December 2020
Page 19900
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
2005 2010 2015 2017
Industry and  comm ercial Domestic TransportSund erland  carbon emissions breakdown by source 
(per thousand  tonnes)
Figure 2: Sunderland carbon emissions breakdown by source (per thousand tonnes)below its appropriate global share. The  
carbon budget shapes the rate at which we  
need to decrease emissions each year.  
The Tyndall Centre, based at Manchester  
University, has calculated carbon budgets  
for all UK Local Authorities3. Their report for  
Sunderland makes 3 key recommendations,  
“in order for the city to make its ‘fair’  
contribution towards the Paris Climate  
Change Agreement”. These are that  
Sunderland should:  
1.Stay within a maximum cumulative  
carbon dioxide emissions budget of 8.2  
million tonnes (Mt CO2) for the period of  
2020 to 2100;  
2.Initiate an immediate programme of CO2 mitigation to deliver cuts in emissions  
averaging a minimum of -14.4% per year  
to deliver a Paris-aligned carbon  
budget;  
3.Reach zero or near zero carbon no later  
than 2040.  
The need to achieve signiﬁcant reductions  
in the short term are clear. At 2017 CO2 
emission levelsiii, Sunderland would use this  
entire 8.2m tonnes budget within 6 years  
from 2020.  
The Tyndall Centre states that, by following  
this carbon reduction recommendation of a  
reduction of 14.4%, 5% of the city’s carbon  
budget would remain by 2040. This  
remaining budget could either be offset  
3The Setting City Area Targets and Trajectories for Emissions Reduction (SCATTER) tool, commissioned by Department for Business Energy and  
Industrial Strategy (BEIS), has developed a methodology for Local Authorities to set carbon emissions targets that are consiste nt with United Nations  
Paris Climate Agreement.Sunderland Low Carbon Framework  
December 2020
Page 20Road transport
413.9
Domestic Gas
312.2Industrial and  
comm ercial Gas
305.9Domestic Elect ricity
99.5Industrial installations and  other fuels
58.7Domestic othe r fuels
33.8Rail and  other transport
2.6
Industrial and  
comm ercial Elect ricity
305.9Sund erland  carbon emissions breakdown by source 
(in detail, per thousand  tonnes)  
Figure 3: Sunderland carbon emissions breakdown by source (in detail, per thousand tonnes)Sunderland Low Carbon Framework  
December 2020
Page 21through carbon saving measures, or  
Sunderland could opt to forgo all of these  
remaining emissions in one go and cut  
emissions to zero at this point. The following ﬁgure (Figure 4) indicates how  
the Tyndall Centre recommendation of a -
14.4% annual decrease would reach the  
2050 target, as well as signiﬁcantly  
reducing carbon emissions across the  
city by 2030. By comparison, as a second  
scenario, continuing with the current  
reduction trend shows that Sunderland  
would fall short of achieving the 2050  
UK commitment.  
A third scenario in Figure 4 proposes a 25%  
per year reduction in carbon emissions  
which, in theory, might enable the city to  
reach carbon neutrality by 2030 by  
including an element of offsetting. However,  
to reach this target, Sunderland would have  
to reduce its carbon emissions by over 70%  
(1m tonnes) within the next 5 years to  
achieve this.Sunderland Low Carbon Framework  
December 2020
Page 22Declaration of climate  
change emergency and  
commitment  
In recognition of the Paris Accord, in March  
2019 Sunderland City Council declared a  
climate emergency and agreed to the  
following motion:  
 In addition, the Council has also signed the  
UK 100 Pledge, which is a commitment to  
shifting to 100% clean energy by 2050. It is  
therefore likely that the energy system will  
need to be decarbonised by 2050.  
Sunderland will play its full part in limiting  
the impacts of climate change by  
adopting and meeting science-based  
targets, in line with the 2015 Paris Accord.  
The city has therefore adopted the  
recommendation made by the Tyndall  
Centre to achieve a minimum -14.4% per  
year reduction in CO2 emissions.  
Our vision  
 
To help us achieve our vision, we will work  
with partners and with Government to  
identify support and investment which  
can enable us to bring forward  
achievement of our vision.  
The Shadow Board is referred to as the  “In recognition of the threat posed to  
our environment by climate change  
Sunderland City Council will declare  
a climate emergency. Numerous local  
authorities around the country have  
declared climate emergency and it is  
important for the Council to show it  
takes the issue seriously. Recent  
weather and changes in ecosystems  
show that we are already seeing  
changes as a result of climate change  
so it is important to join other councils  
in giving the issue suitable attention  
and clearly setting out  
how we will meet our targets on  
cutting emissions.”“Through joint partnership with local  
residents, communities and business,  
Sunderland aims to become a carbon  
neutral city by 2040.”2,500
2,000
1,500
1,000
500
0
2005 2010 2015 2016 2017 2022 2025 20 302 0 35 2040 2045 2050
25% to reach 2030 target Tynda ll 14.4% Current reduction trendCarbon Reduction Scenari os
Figure 4: Tyndall Carbon Reduction Scenarios2030 Board, this was to reﬂect our  
aspirations to achieve our vision by 2030.  
However, we must be led by science and the  
data at this point in time. The 2030 Shadow  
board will work to achieve our vision for  
carbon neutrality at the  
earliest opportunity. Sunderland Low Carbon Framework  
December 2020
Page 23Strategic  
priorities and  
objectives  
City Plan and delivering on  
carbon reduction  
The City Plan, published in 2019 provides  
the blueprint for all partners and  
communities to work together, to address  
the economic and social challenges that  
Sunderland faces so that the city and its  
people can achieve their full potential.  
The City Plan is clear about what we need  
to do to achieve our bold and ambitious  
vision to create a connected, international  
city by 2030 with opportunities for all our  
residents. To achieve this, the City Plan has  
three themes:  
•by 2030 Sunderland will be a dynamic  
city with more and better jobs, it will be  
on course to become a low-carbon  
economy with a great choice of housing.  
It will be a digitally connected city  
providing ﬁbre to every premise, and the  
best ultra-high capacity, low latency  
wireless network for its businesses,  
residents and visitors  
•it will be a healthy city where people will  
live healthier lives for longer, with people  
accessing our wonderful natural assets  
such as our beaches, parks and  
countryside  
•and it will be a vibrant city, rich with the  
diversity of great creative and cultural  
businesses. The residents of Sunderland  
will be active, enjoying a fulﬁlling cultural  
life, and clean, green and safe  
neighbourhoods  Whilst the development of a low carbon  
economy is directly linked to the Dynamic  
City theme in the City Plan, it is clear that a  
sustainable approach to carbon reduction  
in Sunderland should be adopted across all  
ﬁelds of work and that this Framework will  
play a major role towards delivering wider  
City Plan key objectives and social value.  
The beneﬁts that a low carbon approach  
can bring to these wider objectives are as  
follows:  
•Helping to eliminate fuel poverty -  
by supporting and helping residents  
to improve the energy performance  
of their homes and to make savings  
on heating costs;  
•Providing cleaner air - by replacing  
existing polluting vehicles with ultra  
low emission alternatives and ensuring  
that public transport, walking and  
cycling become the preferred choices  
of transport;  
•Creating safer streets - by adapting  
streets to provide more pleasant  
conditions for walking and cycling, this  
in turn will reduce the of motor vehicles,  
making streets safer to use for all;  
•Developing a green and successful  
economy - by supporting the city’s green  
economy to grow, all businesses to  
become more sustainable, as well as  
adding to the city’s inward investment  
offer through the city’s special  
landscape mixture of seaside, river  
estuary, industrial heritage, wildlife  
and geology;  Sunderland Low Carbon Framework  
December 2020
Page 25Sunderland Low Carbon Framework  
December 2020
Page 26•Improving physical and mental health -  
by encouraging active travel and better  
use of our environment, Sunderland  
people will gain better physical and  
mental health, which in turn will reduce  
the impact on healthcare services;  
•Helping to eliminate food poverty -  
by expanding local food networks and  
increasing the availability of fresh  
and seasonal food;  
•Reducing social isolation - by enabling  
local residents to have increased  
opportunities to be involved in  
community projects, which in turn can  
raise civic pride, increase community  
wealth-building and encourage active  
and healthier lifestyles;  
•Reducing waste, which will not only  
reduce the impact on the environment  
but also save money for residents by  
reducing the volume of food thrown  
away. Using our waste in smarter  
ways could also support the growth  
of green business;  
•Developing our green infrastructure,  
which will help to reduce the potential  
for ﬂash ﬂooding, help to cool our city in  
the summer, support wildlife diversity,  
tourism and provide quality  
greenspaces for local people to enjoy;  
•Developing varied local sources of  
energy which will help to ensure that the  
city has energy security.  
Low carbon  
strategic priorities  
The action that is needed to achieve our  
ambition is complex and multifaceted. This  
Framework details seven strategic  
priorities where action is needed to achieve  
the vision for Sunderland. Across each of  
these, we need action at every level.  
These priorities need to be embedded into  
the everyday life of residents, partner  
organisations, community groups,  
businesses and students. Each of these  
priorities are explained in more detail below,  
together with an appended range of  
actions which will deliver the objective.  Our behaviour  
 
Strategic Priority 1:  
Engage with residents, communities and  
partners and encourage positive behaviour  
change to reduce individual carbon  
footprints.  
Policies and  
operational practices  
 
Strategic Priority 2:  
Adapt the policies and operational  
practices of our organisations to embrace  
and support carbon initiatives, including  
climate resilience and offsetting,  
procurement, governance and  
engagement.  
An energy efﬁcient  
built environment  
 
Strategic Objective 3:  
Improve energy efﬁciency of existing homes  
and buildings and infrastructure and work  
towards zero carbon for new homes and  
buildingsRenewable energy generation  
and storage  
 
Strategic Objective 4: 
Develop renewable energy generation  
and storage, and renewable/district heating  
schemes  
Low carbon and  
active transport  
 
Strategic Priority 5: 
Develop low carbon and active transport  
modes such as walking, cycling, rail, Metro,  
electric and innovative technologies for  
buses and private vehicles, and help make  
public transport a more attractive choice.  
Green economy  
 
Strategic Priority 6:  
Grow the city’s green economy, and engage  
with businesses to work towards  
environmental sustainabilityConsumption and waste  
 
Strategic Priority 7:  
Reduce the volume of all consumption and  
waste, changing what we consume and how  
it is produced, continuing to avoid the  
disposal of waste by landﬁll and increasing  
opportunities to reuse materials and  
recycle waste wherever possible. Sunderland Low Carbon Framework  
December 2020
Page 27 Strategic Priority 1:  
 Adapt our behaviour  
 
Background  
To reach carbon neutrality, collective action  
is needed. It will require the input of every  
employee, every resident and every  
individual in the city to be successful.  
As individuals, people often report feeling  
unable to make changes on a scale that  
matters for something as big as climate  
change. But individual behaviour change,  
when taken up by many people, makes a  
decisive difference. Nearly two-thirds of  
global emissions are linked to both direct  
and indirect forms of human consumption -  
if we all re-address our individual  
behaviours we can make an enormous  
contribution to reducing global emissions.  
As businesses and organisations, we must  
act responsibly and positively to these  
challenges, in order to inﬂuence change  
and encourage others to follow our  
example. Meeting our climate challenge  
requires ﬁnding innovative ways of  
engaging individuals, households, and  
communities, and changing patterns of  
behaviour that are ingrained in routine  
ways of life.  
10 key behaviour changes  
Our collective approach to achieving our  
goals can be supported via mobilising  
and incentivising individual behaviour  
change through 10 key behaviour  
changes as follows: Home Energy  
1.Manage home heating -  Some of the  
greatest savings could be made by  
turning down heating and hot water  
thermostats and making sure heating is  
on only when it needs it to be. This would  
also save money;  
2.Upgrade your heating -  Upgrading to  
modern A-rated condensing boilers  
could make a big difference to emissions  
and bills. In some areas, even greater  
savings could be achieved by installing  
microgeneration technologies, such as  
solar water heating, biomass boilers and  
heat pumps or participating in district  
heating schemes;  
3.Improve home insulation -  Ensuring that  
insulation, draught prooﬁng and double  
glazing help reduce the amount of heat  
lost from homes, meaning we could  
reduce the energy we need to use to  
heat them and save money;  
4.Save electricity -  Buying energy efﬁcient  
appliances, lightbulbs, TVs and other  
products, when these need to be  
replaced, and using them as efﬁciently  
as possible (for example turning off  
lights, not leaving things on standby,  
ﬁlling up washing machines and dryers  
instead of running half loads) would help  
to tackle emissions from electricity  
consumption and reduce bills;  
Transport  
5.Become less reliant on the car -  Active  
travel (walking and cycling) for short  
journeys is good for health, low cost and  
low carbon. Where active travel isn’t  
possible, public transport and/or car  
sharing offer lower carbon alternatives; Our objective is to:  
Engage with residents, communities and  
partners and encourage positive  
behaviour change to reduce individual  
carbon footprints.Sunderland Low Carbon Framework  
December 2020
Page 296.Drive more efﬁciently -  Using a fuel  
efﬁcient, hybrid, alternative fuel or  
electric car can signiﬁcantly reduce  
emissions. Some best in class cars for  
fuel economy emit half the carbon of the  
worst cars in the same class and can  
save large amounts of money on fuel.  
Driving more efﬁciently by following  
‘eco-driving’ principles also saves fuel  
and money;  
7.Limit air travel -  Using alternatives to  
ﬂying where practical, compared to  
alternatives, planes create a lot of  
emissions. While ﬂying may be the  
only practical choice for some journeys,  
there are often alternatives that  
can work instead, taking the train  
or teleconferencing for business,  
for example;  
Food  
8.Avoid food waste -  Most of us say we  
don’t like wasting food, but evidence  
suggests that two thirds of the food  
thrown away could be avoided. Food  
waste is estimated to be equivalent to  
removing one in four cars from the road,  
so this is an issue that it is important for  
us all to address;  
9.Consider what we eat and drink -  Eating  
a healthy diet, high in fruit and  
vegetables that are in season where we  
live. There is some dispute about the  
exact make-up of a low-carbon diet.  
What is clear is that food in season  
locally usually needs less energy for  
growing and transporting, that locally  
sourced fruit and vegetables have lower  
carbon footprints than most meat and  
processed foods, and that a healthy diet  
can help reduce carbon emissions from  
the food we eat.  
Consumption  
10.Reduce and reuse -  We need to reduce  
the amount of waste we produce and  
reuse materials where possible in  
addition to the efforts we already make  
on recycling. Production of goods and  
disposal of materials contributes directly  
to emissions. The most sustainable  
option is to prevent waste being  produced in the ﬁrst place (for example  
avoiding over-packaged goods or  
choosing items that will last longer). This  
can be achieved by improving the use of  
already available resources, reusing or  
refurbishing products and materials so  
that they don’t become waste and  
considering the whole life cycle of  
products before buying (known as the  
Circular Economy). Where waste is  
unavoidable, materials like cans, glass,  
paper and textiles can be recycled to  
make new products.  Sunderland Low Carbon Framework  
December 2020
Page 30 Strategic Priority 2:  
 Adapt the policies and  
operational practices  
of our organisations  
 
Organisational Policies  
Organisational policies such as agile  
working, sustainable travel plans can have  
a signiﬁcant impact on reducing carbon  
emissions across the city. The 2030 Shadow  
Board and other partners will be working  
together to align their policies and  
procedures where appropriate.  
The pandemic has accelerated some of  
these practises across the partnership such  
as working from home. Time is required to  
fully understand the impact on reducing  
carbon across Sunderland.  
Procurement  
Procurement is key, and national guidance  
is under review that may encourage and  
enable changes to be instigated swiftly.  
Nevertheless, procedures must be  
reconsidered to fully evaluate and assess  
the lifetime carbon footprint of everything  
that is purchased and commissioned.  
Through procurement and supply chains,  
organisations should think about:•Resources they use and how these can  
be reduced or improved  
•Local and sustainable sourcing  
of materials  
•Training and awareness raising  
within the organisation and in the  
wider community  
•Investment in green spaces and the local  
built environment.  
Revising our procurement process could  
enable signiﬁcant carbon savings to take  
place by purchasing goods with lower  
carbon footprints and altering our whole  
approach to consumption.  
Climate Resilience  
and Adaptation  
Climate change is increasing the likelihood  
of extreme weather events. Local residents  
and businesses will increasingly be at risk  
from ﬂooding, and those identiﬁed to be  
living in the most vulnerable parts of the  
city will have more difﬁculty obtaining  
affordable property insurance. The  
increased frequency of hot and cold spells  
will also particularly impact on elderly and  
vulnerable people and will therefore  
increase the impact on health services.  
We must therefore adapt our city to ensure  
that it is more climate resilient to minimise  
these impacts.  
Adaptation refers to actions that reduce  
vulnerability to climate change impacts,  
reducing its effect on social, economic and  
natural systems. Resilience refers to the  
ability of a system and its components to  Our objective is to:  
Adapt the policies and operational  
practices of our organisations to  
embrace and support carbon initiatives  
including climate resilience, including  
offsetting, procurement, governance  
and engagement.Sunderland Low Carbon Framework  
December 2020
Page 31anticipate, absorb and recover from effects  
of an event in an efﬁcient and timely  
manner. Both adaptation and resilience are  
especially important when taking action  
against future climate change and must be  
considered alongside actions to reduce  
carbon emissions across the city.  
Offsetting  
Sunderland will also develop an off-setting  
approach. This could involve increased  
capture of CO2 in a process called carbon  
sequestration, which means using nature or  
geology around the city to take carbon  
from the atmosphere and store it. This  
could be stored in plants, trees and soil, or  
in underground spaces between rocks.  
If we can increase the city’s capability of  
storing carbon, this will support our goal of  
reaching carbon neutrality. There are wider  
beneﬁts from this approach including  
improved access to quality greenspace  
which in turn will encourage better physical  
and mental health, and environmental  
improvements to wildlife and habitat.  
Offsetting will make a positive contribution  
to the city’s carbon emissions, by increasing  
the city’s capability for carbon storage.  
Currently, BEIS data indicates that carbon  
offsetting relates to a saving of 7,500 tonnes  
annually in Sunderland, which is made up of  
the city’s carbon stock in woodland,  
cropland, grassland and wetlands. There is  
scope through improved green  
infrastructure to increase this annual ﬁgure.  
Effective engagement  
Effective engagement of organisations’  
workforces, partner agencies, sectors and  
all people who live and work in, or visit, the  
city is vital to this process, ensuring that  
everyone embraces these principles within  
their daily lives and activities.Current/recent activities  
and actions  
•Businesses across the city are  
undertaking revised procurement  
methods to adapt to initiatives such  
as 100% renewable energy tariffs or  
adopting whole lifestyle approaches  
towards procuring products and  
the environmental impacts of  
product providers;  
•Partners have worked together to carry  
out schemes to minimise incidents of  
groundwater, surface and ﬂuvial  
ﬂooding in key locations of the city.  
Improvements have also been carried  
out to riparian habitat that helps to  
reduce the immediate ﬂow of water into  
and through the main river channels;  
•The Council has increased tree cover  
through the Urban Tree Fund, which in  
time will help to shade areas and to  
reduce heat extremes in urban areas,  
where built development may otherwise  
absorb and increase local temperatures;  
•The city’s Core Strategy and  
Development Plan protects open  
countryside and wildlife habitats,  
which is vital to retaining the city’s  
existing carbon sink;  
•Wildlife and green infrastructure  
improvements are being carried out  
in a range of locations across the  
city to mitigate for approved  
development schemes;  
•Reclamation of former industrial land  
has been carried out across various sites  
in the city, often transforming land into  
country parks;  
Opportunities and Beneﬁts  
•Helping to develop a green and  
successful economy by supporting  
the city’s green industry sector  
through procurement;  
•Developing our green infrastructure to  
help to reduce the potential for ﬂash  
ﬂooding, and to cool our city in the  
summer. This will also support wildlife  Sunderland Low Carbon Framework  
December 2020
Page 32diversity, tourism and provide quality  
greenspaces for local people to enjoy;  
•Providing cleaner air by improving green  
infrastructure across the city that can  
store more carbon and other  
greenhouse gases and contribute  
towards better air quality;  
•Reducing social isolation by  
encouraging active local involvement in  
community green infrastructure  
projects, we can encourage more  
interaction, better physical and mental  
health and pride in local areas.Sunderland Low Carbon Framework  
December 2020
Page 33 Strategic Priority 3:  
 Create an energy  
efﬁcient built  
environment  
 
Our homes and our communities are at the  
heart of our lives, providing a place of  
warmth, security and rest. The quality of the  
homes in Sunderland and future new build  
homes need to be upgraded to be more  
energy efﬁcient.  
Existing Homes  
An estimated 80% of the buildings that will  
exist in the UK in 2050 have already been  
built. They were built at a time when  
climate change and energy considerations  
were much less of a priority than today.  
Existing buildings typically have a large  
carbon footprint due to the energy  
required to heat them.  
Adapting homes to be more energy efﬁcient  
and resilient to climate change will improve  
living conditions, reduce energy demand,  
reduce fuel costs, improve health and  
wellbeing of residents and minimise  
incidents of fuel poverty in the city.  
15,678 households in Sunderland live in fuel  
poverty (2017)4, in poorly insulated homes  
which cost more to heat and are hard to  
retroﬁt. Action on our homes needs to  
support Sunderland’s most vulnerable  
residents out of fuel poverty and provide  the most energy efﬁcient, low or carbon  
neutral homes possible.  
Retroﬁtting makes a building more energy  
efﬁcient. Improving the performance of  
existing homes requires upgrading of the  
fabric of the building and the heating  
systems. This will improve the thermal  
performance of the building by ensuring  
that the roof, walls and ﬂoors are fully  
insulated, and windows and doors have a  
high thermal performance.  
There are currently low levels of domestic  
and non-domestic retroﬁtting taking place  
in the city, other than by registered housing  
providers, such as Gentoo and a handful of  
proactive private homeowners. This is  
partly due to a lack of knowledge and  
demand for retroﬁtting, limited access to  
funding (including low-cost loans), lack of  
skills and local supply chain, and a lack of  
ﬁnancial incentives and business models to  
make investment in retroﬁt stack up for  
homeowners, public and private landlords.  
This is in part due to the amount it costs to  
retroﬁt a property and the time it takes to  
recover that investment through reduced  
energy costs.  
New Build  
Sunderland, like many cities, is growing and  
is set to continue to grow. We need to tackle  
the amount of CO2 that is emitted through  
the construction of new buildings (including  
the emissions embodied in the materials  
themselves) and those emitted once the  
building is occupied. We need to ensure that  
42019 Public Health EnglandOur objective is to:  
Improve energy efﬁciency of existing  
homes and buildings and work  
towards zero carbon for new homes  
and buildings.Sunderland Low Carbon Framework  
December 2020
Page 35new developments in the city don’t eat into  
our limited carbon budgets.  
Sunderland has seen a steady increase in  
the number of new build properties in the  
city and the number of these that are built  
to EPC band A-B standard. This is a  
signiﬁcant improvement and has been  
driven by a change in Building Regulations  
but we are still not seeing properties being  
built beyond building regulations standards.  
It is expected that an average home built to  
the Future Homes Standard will have 75-
80% less carbon emissions than one built to  
current energy efﬁciency requirements  
(Approved Document L 2013). This will be  
achieved through very high fabric  
standards and a low carbon heating  
system. This means a new home built to the  
Future Homes Standard might have a heat  
pump, triple glazing and standards for  
walls, ﬂoors and roofs that signiﬁcantly limit  
any heat loss. The Future Homes Standard  
will be achieved through a staged approach  
starting with the revised building standards  
in 2020 and then further requirements in a  
new Future Homes Standard by 2025.  
Emissions contribution  
Emissions from domestic electricity and gas  
totalled 445,000 tonnes in 2017, dominated  
by gas emissions (70%) and electricity  
emissions (22%). Overall, since 2005, there  
has been a 36.7% reduction in CO2 emissions.  
Current/recent activities  
and actions  
•local planning policies have been  
approved that encourage new  
development to minimise the impacts of  
climate change, avoid unacceptable  
adverse development impacts,  
maximise energy efﬁciency and  
integrate the use of decentralised,  
renewable and low carbon energy;  
•several partners across the city are  
carrying out energy saving measures  
across their respective estates, including  
the introduction of LED lighting,  
automatic metering, improved insulation  
and green power use;  •Gentoo has installed ground source heat  
pumps, thermal batteries, smart controls  
and thermostats to 7 high rise blocks of  
ﬂats, and has also provided solar panels  
on over 5,500 properties in Sunderland;  
•the Council is also working with local  
businesses on energy savings initiatives,  
providing advice, guidance and support  
funding through EU funded projects.  
Opportunities and Beneﬁts  
•improving the energy performance of  
homes and saving heating costs will help  
to eliminate fuel poverty;  
•improving energy efﬁciency of  
commercial premises will reduce  
running costs for businesses and make  
commercial buildings easier to lease;  
•introducing cleaner and greener energy  
for housing will improve air quality and  
provide purity of supply and cost.Sunderland Low Carbon Framework  
December 2020
Page 36 Strategic Priority 4:  
 Develop renewable  
energy generation  
and storage  
 
Background  
Energy is essential for our city. It provides  
heat for our homes and places of work and  
powers our transport. It also accounts for  
the lion’s share of our city-wide emissions.  
The vision of being carbon neutral requires  
producing more renewable and low carbon  
energy locally in addition to reducing the  
overall amount of energy consumed.  
Storing energy locally and managing our  
energy in a smarter and timelier way will be  
essential. This can reduce the peaks that  
make energy demand hard to cater for, and  
get more out of the renewable energy we  
produce, reducing both bills and carbon.  
Industrial and domestic buildings emit 71%  
of the city’s carbon emissions. Whilst  
improving the energy efﬁciency of buildings  
and processes, we begin to reduce the size  
of the energy decarbonisation challenge.  
Without sufﬁcient energy efﬁciency  
improvements, the UK and Sunderland  
will struggle to sufﬁciently decarbonise  
energy supply, as higher carbon options  
will continue to be needed to meet  
peak demand.  
Since 2010, the UK electricity national grid  
has seen its CO2 intensity ﬁgures decrease  
by 47%. Huge progress has been made over  
recent years to decarbonise the UK’s  national grid electricity by phasing out the  
remaining coal-ﬁred power stations and  
recently removing restrictions on new  
onshore wind energy development. We now  
get more of our electricity from renewable  
sources than ever before, however as the  
generation from renewable energy sources  
is often variable, electricity storage and  
management to use power when it is  
available is increasingly important.  
The vast majority of our homes, our public  
and commercial buildings, are heated using  
gas from the national gas grid. Gas is also a  
key component of our national electricity  
system, being burned in gas power stations  
to generate electricity. Unlike the electricity  
grid, the gas grid is very much at the start  
of the decarbonisation process, and is  
primarily looking towards hydrogen to act  
as the future fuel vector for supply of  
energy through the existing gas grid.  
The UK has two main options for natural  
gas use in the UK:  
•stop using it (except in a small number  
of instances where viable alternatives  
don’t exist, such as in some industrial  
processes) and move to electric heating,  
heat pumps and zero carbon district  
heating instead, or;  
•replace it with biogas and/or hydrogen.  
We need to consider alternatives sources of  
energy across the city. Our objective is to:  
Develop renewable energy generation  
and storage, and renewable/district  
heating schemes.Sunderland Low Carbon Framework  
December 2020
Page 37Emissions contribution  
Renewable energy generation and  
storage can provide a very positive  
contribution to carbon emissions, creating  
green, zero emission technology that will  
replace more traditional, carbon-emitting  
forms of energy.  
Current/recent activities  
and actions  
•Nissan’s Sunderland plant is partly  
powered by wind turbines and solar  
panels;  
•the council is installing solar panels on  
a number of its sites including buildings  
and car ports, and battery storage  
facilities are being created at 6  
council buildings;  
•investigation is underway into the  
potential of minewater heating;  
•Gentoo has installed ground source heat  
pumps, thermal batteries, smart controls  
and thermostats to 7 high rise blocks of  
ﬂats in Sunderland.  
Opportunities and Beneﬁts  
•improving the energy performance of  
homes and saving heating costs will help  
to eliminate fuel poverty;  
•introducing cleaner and greener  
energy for housing and industry will  
improve air quality;  
•developing varied local sources of  
energy will help to ensure that the city  
has power certainty/security.Sunderland Low Carbon Framework  
December 2020
Page 38 Strategic Priority 5:  
 Low carbon and  
active transport  
 
Background  
Transport is the UK’s largest contributor to  
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. 28% of UK  
emissions originate from transport, and this  
does not include international aviation and  
shipping. Most domestic transport  
emissions, approximately 90%, are from  
road transport and, while emissions from  
other sectors of the economy have fallen,  
an increase in vehicle kilometres driven has  
negated increased vehicle efﬁciencies,  
resulting in only modest reductions of  
emissions since 1990.  
Transport enables the movement of people  
and goods, supports economic growth and  
provides employment for city residents.  
Despite many recent technological and  
efﬁciency improvements, transport in the  
city is still responsible for approximately  
416,000 tonnes of CO2 in 2017, 29.0% of  
Sunderland’s total CO2 emissions.  
Historically, Sunderland has had a level of  
car ownership that is lower than the UK  
average. However, in recent decades car  
ownership and car trips have steadily risen,  
while use of public transport has fallen.  
Despite the extension of Metro to  
Sunderland in 2001, access to Metro and rail  
stations remains limited across the city,  
including areas that were once served by  
rail stations but lost these rail links when  services were closed during the 1960s under  
the ‘Beeching’ Act.  
There is considerable scope to improve  
public transport services and Ultra Low  
Emissions Vehicle/Electric Vehicles  
infrastructure across the city, together with  
developing strategic cycling routes that link  
homes to jobs, shops, schools and everyday  
services. Improvements in neighbourhood  
design can also encourage more walking  
trips locally and reduce the number of short  
trips undertaken by car.  
The rise of cleaner fuels, in particular  
electric fuel, will continue over the next  
decade following proposals to end the sale  
of all new petrol and diesel cars by 2035.  
Currently there are almost 3,000 registered  
electric vehicles in the North East, and over  
800 chargers. Other sectors including the  
bus and logistics industries are also  
investing in this area. A cleaner vehicle ﬂeet  
results in potentially improved air quality  
and a more efﬁcient energy sector.  
The North East has been at the forefront of  
decarbonisation and developing low-carbon  
solutions for its transport network, with  
successes in offshore wind technologies and  
electric vehicles. The North East Automotive  
Alliance (NEAA) is an internationally  
signiﬁcant automotive cluster that brings  
together regional organisations on  
workstreams including advanced propulsion.  
Transport operators are also reducing  
emissions from buses and freight vehicles,  
including the successful deployment of  
biomethane operated buses in Sunderland  
by Stagecoach and the roll-out of nine  
electric buses for Go North East. The new  
Metro ﬂeet will be 32% more energy  
efﬁcient, saving tonnes of carbon over the  
coming years.  Our objective is to:  
Develop low carbon and active transport  
modes such as walking, cycling, rail,  
Metro, electric and innovative  
technologies for buses and private  
vehicles, and help make public transport  
a more attractive choice.Sunderland Low Carbon Framework  
December 2020
Page 39Emissions contribution  
Transport emissions contributed 416,000  
tonnes of CO2 in 2017, 29.0% of Sunderland’s  
total CO2 emissions. Of these emissions,  
99.4% come as a result of road transport on  
‘minor’ roads, ‘ A’ roads and Motorways from  
cars, vans, lorries and buses.  
Since 2005, there has been a 13% decrease  
in transport emissions across the city,  
despite the overall number of vehicle miles  
broadly staying the same. Until recently,  
concentrations of the air pollutant NO2,  
emitted mainly by diesel vehicles, were  
above limits set to protect public health.  
Current/recent activities  
and actions  
•Introduction of EV ﬁlling stations in  
the city;  
•Decarbonisation of Sunderland  
council vehicles;  
•Work with Nexus and the bus operators  
to develop low carbon bus options and  
seek funding to help operators to  
purchase biogas, hydrogen and  
electric buses;  
•Develop new Metro routes in the city;  
•The continued roll-out of new cycling  
routes across the city;  
•Neighbourhood improvements that  
encourage more walking and inﬂuence  
behaviour change; and  
•Working with businesses to adopt  
sustainable transport practices.  
Opportunities and Beneﬁts  
The steps taken towards low carbon  
transport will have broader positive  
impacts within Sunderland. These  
will include: •More public transport options for local  
residents and increased accessibility;  
•Safer and more attractive conditions for  
walking and cycling;  
•Improved air quality and environment;  
•Healthier and more active lifestyles  
supported;  
•Contributing to Sunderland being a  
better and more attractive place to live,  
work and invest in.Sunderland Low Carbon Framework  
December 2020
Page 40 Strategic Priority 6:  
 Grow the city’s  
green economy  
 
Background  
Industrial operations and business premises  
require high-intensity energy use and are a  
signiﬁcant source of carbon emissions.  
However SMEs and larger businesses form  
the backbone of the local economy,  
creating vital employment and delivering  
goods and services.  
Their potential for carbon reduction via  
energy efﬁciency and renewable energy  
improvements is signiﬁcant and realising  
this potential is an essential component in  
the shift towards a low carbon economy.  
SMEs need ongoing support to recognise  
the vital role they play in creating a low  
carbon economy.  
Emissions contribution  
Emissions from industry totalled 582,000  
tonnes in 2017, a rise of 131,000 tonnes on  
2016, but still representing a 28% reduction  
from 2005 CO2 emissions.  
Business Renewables Energy Efﬁciency  
Sunderland (BREEZ), the Business Energy  
Saving Project (BEST) and the Sunderland  
Energy Storage & Efﬁciency Project (SESEP)  
will contribute towards signiﬁcantly  
reducing the CO2 footprint from many  
Sunderland based SMEs. All three projects  
are part-funded by the European Regional  
Development Fund (ERDF).  Current/recent activities  
and actions  
•Nissan continues to build its all electric  
LEAF in Sunderland, with batteries also  
being manufactured in the city by  
Envision AESC  
•Businesses like Hyperdrive Innovation,  
Advanced Electric Machines, Green  
Marine, PowerRoll, EDF Energy and many  
more provide key employment in the  
city’s green economy  
•The Driving the Electric Revolution (DER)  
Centre NE, led by Newcastle University,  
will play a critical role in electriﬁcation of  
advanced manufacturing across all  
sectors - from automotive to marine, rail,  
and energy - and the commercial  
development of Power Electronics,  
Machines and Drives.  
•BREEZ and BEST combine to offer 135  
eligible SMEs in Sunderland a ﬂexible  
approach to cutting their  
carbon emissions;  
•Free initial energy review to assess the  
potential for carbon reduction in an SME  
- BREEZ/BEST eligibility check, open  
discussion and walk around survey;  
•Fully-funded commercial EPC for SMEs  
(Level 3 or 4) if required via BREEZ; or  
•BEST provide a fully funded  
comprehensive Energy Audit which  
details the broader opportunities to  
further cut carbon emissions and  
save energy;Our objective is to:  
Grow the city’s green economy, and  
engage with businesses to work towards  
environmental sustainability.Sunderland Low Carbon Framework  
December 2020
Page 41•Support through awareness raising  
campaigns and bespoke costed energy  
saving advice and guidance, including  
upgrades to industrial process  
machinery and plant;  
•50% grants through BREEZ and BEST for  
Sunderland-based, eligible SMEs 50%  
funding towards the cost of installing  
renewable energy, insulation, low carbon  
heating and LED lighting improvements  
to business premises;  
Opportunities and Beneﬁts  
•Developing a green and successful  
economy – by supporting the city’s  
green economy to grow, all businesses to  
become more sustainable, as well as  
adding to the city’s inward investment  
offer through the city’s special  
landscape mixture of seaside, river  
estuary, industrial heritage, wildlife  
and geology;  
•Reducing carbon emissions from SMEs;  
•Increasing the economic success of  
SMEs through reducing the costs arising  
from energy requirements, enabling  
investment in other areas;  
•Exploring the potential to become a test  
bed for geothermal energy  
•Creating education and training  
opportunities in technical roles which  
support green technologies.Sunderland Low Carbon Framework  
December 2020
Page 42 Strategic Priority 7:  
 Reduce consumption  
and waste  
 
Background  
Our consumption of the planet’s resources  
is threatening the wellbeing of future  
generations and limited natural resources  
we depend upon. Our material footprint is  
rapidly outpacing population and economic  
growth. Evidence shows that our total  
environmental footprint is greater than  
what the planet can sustain, something  
known as ‘overshoot’.  
Food and Drink is particular has a large and  
visible impact on the environment, and our  
greenhouse gas emissions – whether in  
production, consumption or disposal. British  
households throw away 7.2 million tonnes of  
food and drink (the majority of which could  
have been consumed) worth £12 billion  
every year (source: WRAP).  
Food waste includes surplus food (when  
too much was purchased, stocked or  
produced) and food that is not ﬁt for  
animal or human consumption but which  
could be used for compost or energy  
recovery (anaerobic digestion).Waste  
Greenhouse gas emissions from the waste  
sector mainly comprise methane released  
from landﬁll sites. Landﬁll emissions can be  
reduced in three ways: creating less waste,  
sending less waste to landﬁll and capturing  
more of the methane released at landﬁll  
sites. Increased reuse and recycling and  
other waste prevention measures are  
generally low cost and can also contribute  
to reductions in upstream emissions (e.g.  
avoiding food waste not only avoids  
emissions in disposal of that waste, it also  
avoids emissions in production and  
processing of the food in the ﬁrst place).  
Consumption  
Much of Sunderland’s carbon footprint  
originates from outside of the city, because  
the things that we buy and consume have  
been created elsewhere. These are called  
‘imported emissions’. This includes  
everything from appliances, lightbulbs,  
phones and computers, to tyres, clothing,  
food and packaging.  
As with reducing waste, one of the ways to  
address our carbon footprint is to reduce  
non-essential consumption, reusing,  
repairing and sharing existing goods,  
ﬁnding local producers and more ethical or  
sustainable options.  
The beneﬁts of efﬁcient resource  
management are greater than simply  
reducing emissions arising from the  
manufacturing, transportation, use,  
disposal and processing of waste.  
By thinking differently about how we  
manage resources and what we throw away  
we can generate many beneﬁts to the city  
such as: reducing the number of heavy-load  Our objective is to:  
Reduce the volume of all consumption  
and waste, changing what we consume  
and how it is produced, continuing to  
avoid the disposal of waste by landﬁll  
and increasing opportunities to  
reuse materials and recycle waste  
wherever possible. Sunderland Low Carbon Framework  
December 2020
Page 43vehicles on our roads; alleviating  
congestion and improving air quality;  
avoiding plastic entering our watercourses  
and oceans; reducing ecological and  
biodiversity damage; and creating  
partnerships between organisations to  
derive value from our waste in a local,  
circular economy.  
All of our actions need to be reviewed in  
terms of reducing the carbon footprint from  
waste and consumption and this includes  
reviewing how organised events are  
undertaken within the city. Key issues to  
address will be increasing local food  
production, reducing food miles and air  
pollution as well as tackling food poverty,  
diet-related ill health and access to  
affordable healthy food. We should also ﬁnd  
ways to reduce food and package waste  
such as single use plastics.  
Sunderland must also look at ways to  
increase recycling rates and to ensure  
landﬁll decreases even further, alongside  
a reduction in the total amount of  
household waste. This will require changes  
to processes and physical infrastructure,  
as well as city-wide behavioural changes  
to disposal, sharing, shopping and  
dietary habits.  
The recycling rate in Sunderland is 27%  
(2018 –19) and broadly follows the national  
trend. In recent years, recycling rates have  
levelled out, and the UK Government is now  
developing further measures to minimise  
waste and promote resource efﬁciency.  
Emissions contribution  
Everything we consume has a carbon  
footprint trail. Food and drink that we buy  
comes from all over the world, some  
foodstuffs having a high carbon footprint  
by the way they are created, and/or by the  
way/distance they are transported. These  
are classed as ‘non-local’ or ‘imported’  
greenhouse gas emissions, unlike the  
emissions that more directly relate to the  
city’s transport network or energy  
emissions relating to our buildings. When you consider the direct, indirect and  
imported emissions together (Scope 1, 2 and  
3 emissions respectively), it is estimated  
that around half of the city’s carbon  
footprint relates to ‘imported’ emissions  
from what we buy and consume.  
Current/recent activities  
and actions  
•Sunderland Partnership has committed  
to the Single Use Plastics Pledge  
committing to eliminating the use of  
single use plastics wherever possible,  
e.g. straws, plates, take away boxes and  
cups, from partner estates;  
•Through the revision of the procurement  
process, key businesses will lead  
by example and become more  
sustainable in their use and  
consumption of resources;  
•The Council continues to extend the  
range of materials that residents can  
recycle in the household kerbside  
service through the introduction of  
additional materials, such as drinks  
cartons and plastic pots, tubs & trays;  
•Communal recycling facilities for  
high-rise ﬂats etc. are now in place  
that replicate the kerbside recycling  
service. This means all households  
across Sunderland can easily recycle  
the same materials;  
•No Council contract waste has required  
disposal by landﬁll since April 2015.  
All household waste that has not been  
presented at the kerbside for recycling  
is sent to an energy-from-waste facility,  
where it is incinerated to power a  
turbine that generates electricity for  
the National Grid. This waste disposal  
process is also known as landﬁll  
diversion;  
•The Sunderland Household Waste Reuse  
and Recycling Centre (HWRRC)  
management contract is now incentive-
based, where the contractor is rewarded  
for exceeding pre-agreed targets for  
recycling materials disposed by  
residents. This has enabled new,  Sunderland Low Carbon Framework  
December 2020
Page 44additional, recycling outlets to be  
secured for some traditionally difﬁcult-
to-recycle materials, such as carpets  
and mattresses;  
•Businesses are supporting the  
introduction and development of  
community food networks.  
Opportunities and Beneﬁts  
•Developing a green and successful  
economy, increasing local and low-
carbon food production, reducing  
food waste, developing smarter ways  
of recycling;  
•Reducing waste to not only limit the  
impact on the environment but also  
save money for residents by reducing  
the volume of food thrown away;  
•Helping to eliminate food poverty  
by growing more food locally and  
communally and increasing the  
availability of fresh and seasonal  
food, encouraging more low carbon  
cooking and meals;  
•Encouraging healthier eating and active  
lifestyles, which will help Sunderland  
people gain better physical and mental  
health, which in turn will save money on  
healthcare services;  
•Reducing social isolation by  
encouraging active lifestyles  
and increasing the number of  
community projects;  
•Reducing the carbon emissions of  
city events and developing  
sustainable tourism.Sunderland Low Carbon Framework  
December 2020
Page 45Get involved  
Sunderland has set a target to become  
carbon neutral by 2030. This Carbon  
Neutral Framework has been created to set  
out the vision, and it is widely understood  
that collective sustainable action will be  
required in order to achieve this goal.  
No individual or organisation can deliver  
the city’s vision alone, and we must work  
together to encourage everyone across the  
city to engage in a meaningful way and to  
support people to understand the  
individual, collective and organisational  
changes that we must deliver together.  
Residents  
We will engage with Sunderland residents to  
understand attitudes and behaviours  
around the environment and to ﬁnd out  
what carbon neutral means to them.  
We will use quantitative survey ﬁndings, as  
well as desk research to inform a marketing  
and communications strategy for  
Sunderland to collaboratively take forward  
as a tactical campaign.  
We hope to create a sense of ownership,  
personal responsibility and empowerment  
with our own city’s carbon footprint and the  
small measures and actions we can all take  
to reduce it collectively.  
Young people  
How we act now will have a direct impact on  
the next generation. Actively engaging with  
young people, children and students in  
climate change discussions is fundamental  
in ensuring that the Framework reﬂects  
their views of how Sunderland should adapt  
and address climate change and that they  
feel they can help us to deliver it.  
The partnership includes representation  
from Sunderland Youth Council, but we  
want to do more to encourage engagement  and ensure that this Framework and the  
Action Plans reﬂect the views of young  
people. We will work with Together for  
Children to undertake a programme to  
engage and discuss carbon reduction with  
as many schools in the city as possible. We  
will listen to students concerns regarding  
climate change and their ideas for how we  
can tackle challenges.  
Following this initial engagement, we will  
produce a comprehensive feedback report  
which will identify the key actions and  
changes we will make as a result. We will  
continue to engage in this way on an  
ongoing basis.  
Businesses  
We will engage with businesses of all  
sectors and sizes operating in the city who  
have a crucial role to play in achieving the  
city’s carbon neutral ambitions. We want to  
talk to businesses to ensure we understand  
the challenges they face and help support  
them to capitalise on opportunities  
associated with Low Carbon as well helping  
them work towards carbon neutrality. Sunderland Low Carbon Framework  
December 2020
Page 46oce22134