Net Zero Emissions Action Plan  
 
Introduction  
This is the first iteration of the Net Zero Emissions Action Plan which was peer reviewed by the 
Association for Public Service Excellence (APSE) Energy to inform refinements and future work. It 
builds on previous Council -led work to address climate change inclu ding the Chapel Farm Solar Park; 
the first solar farm funded by a Council -backed community solar bond which won the 2017 APSE 
award for ‘Best Renewable Energy Initiative’.  
 
The Council will regularl y review, reprioritise and add actions to this p lan to take into account 
emer ging best practice, sector innovation and new funding opportunities . For example,  in March this 
year, the Council successfully secured £750k of capital grant funding from the Publ ic Sector 
Decarbonisation Scheme to install a 1.2MW battery at Waterside  Park to store energy from Barnfield 
Solar Farm  and supply the household waste recycling centre .  
 
What do we mean by ‘net zero’ greenhouse gas  emissions?  
 Net zero means achieving a position where  total greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions are equal 
to or less than the emissions the UK removed from the environment. This can be achieved 
by a combination of emission reduction and emission removal.  When the amount of GHG  
emissions produced by a country, organisation or place are cancelled o ut by the amount 
removed, it will be a net zero emitter. GHG emissions can be removed by the natural 
environment (e.g. stored in soils, trees and the ocean ) or by using technologies like  carbon 
capture, usage  and storage . The lower the emissions, the easier this becomes.  
 The target of achieving net zero emissions has been set at a global, country1 and also 
increasingly at a local area and organisational level.  
 In discussio ns on climate change, the  focus is often on carbon dioxide ( CO 2) – the most 
dominant anthropogenic  greenhouse gas2 in terms of the quantity released  and total impact. 
This is produced by burning fossil fuels, industrial producti on and land use change.  
 A number of other GHGs are also driving global climate change: methane, nitrous oxide, and 
trace gases such as  the group of ‘F -gases’. These have contributed a significant amount of 
warming to date.  
 The term “carbon” can be confusing as it is often used as shorthand to refer interchangea bly 
to either CO 2 or GHGs in general (although  not all GHGs contain carbon). For clarity, t his 
Action Pl an refers to “GHG emissions”, covering all greenhouse gases.  
 Further on in this document, the baseline starting point to get to net z ero is set out in 
“carbon dioxide equivalent” or “ CO 2e” - a term for describing different greenhouse gases in 
a common unit. For any quantity and type of greenhouse gas, CO 2e signifies the amount of 
CO 2 which would have the equivalent global warming impact3. 
 
International context  
 Global annual greenhouse gas emis sions have grown 41% since 1990 and are still climbing. 
While emissions dipped notably in 2016, recent data suggests th at carbon dioxide emissions 
increased  each year since then4. 
                                                           
1 As of March 2021, 59 countries have communicated a net -zero target, representing 54% of global GHG emissions, although they vary as 
to whether the target is a political pledge, incorporated into a policy document, or enshrined into law ( e.g. France, German y, and the UK 
have legally binding 2050 net -zero GHG emissions goals): https://www.everycrsreport.com/reports/IF11821.html   
2 Greenhouse gas generated by human activity  
3 ecometrica: Gree nhouse Gases, CO2, CO2e, and Carbon: What Do All These Terms Mean? (August 2012) 
https://ecometrica.com/assets/GHGs -CO2-CO2e -and-Carbon -What -Do-These -Mean -v2.1.pdf   
4 World Resources Institute Greenhouse Gas Emissions by Countries and Sectors (February 2020)  
https://www.wri.org/insights/4 -charts -explain -greenhouse -gas-emissions -countries -and-sectors    The Paris Agreement wa s the first-ever universal, legally binding global climate change 
agreement, adopted at the Paris climate conference (COP21) in December 2015.  
 It sets out a global framework to avoid dangerous climate change by limiting global warming 
to well below 2°C and pursu ing efforts to limit it to 1.5°C. It also aims to strengthen 
countries’ ability to deal with the impacts of climate change and support them in their 
efforts.  
 In November 2021, the UK will host the 26th UN Climate Change Conference of the Parties 
(COP26) i n Glasgow.  Countries are being asked to come forward with ambitious 2030 GHG 
emission  reduction  targets that align with reaching net zero by the middle of the century.  
 
UK context  
 Carbon budgets were introduced in the UK under the 2008 Climate Change Act. Each carbon 
budget provides a five -year, statutory cap on total GHG emissions, which should not be 
exceeded, in order to meet the UK’s emission reduction commitments.  
 In June 2019,  the UK Parliament passed legislation ( 2019 Climate Change Act) requiring the 
UK G overnment to reduce the UK’s net emissions of GHGs by 100% relative to 1990 levels by 
2050. Doing so would make the UK a net zero  emitter. Prior to this, the UK was committed  
to reducing net GHG emissions by at least 80% of their 1990 levels, also by 2050.  
 In June 2021, the UK Government enshrined in law a new climate change target to reduce 
GHG emissions by 78% by 2035 compared to 1990 levels.   This takes the UK more than 
three-quarters of the way to reaching net zero by 20505.  
 The UK Government published a Ten Point Plan for a Green Industrial Revolutio n6 
(November 2020) and an  Industrial Decarbonisation Strategy7 (March 2021) that sets out its 
vision for building a competitive, greener future for the manufacturing and construction 
sector.  It is set to publish a Net Zero Strategy ahead of COP26 , as well as a Heating and 
Building Strategy and Transport Decarbonisation Plan .  
 The Future Homes Stan dard8, due to be introduced by 2025, will require new build homes to 
be future -proofed with  low carbon heating and leadi ng levels of energy efficiency. This is 
expected to  include a ban on installing gas or oil boilers in new homes.  
 HM Treasury is also ex pected to publish this year its Net Zero Review setting out how plans 
to maximise economic growth opportunities from the net zero transition while ensuring 
contributions are fair between consumers, businesses and the British taxpayer.  
 
Local government con text 
 The 2019 Climate Change Act did not include a statutory duty for local authorities to develop 
plans a nd deliver cuts in line with the UK carbon budgets (statutory cap on total GHG 
emissions). Nor did it set local authorities their own carbon budgets.  
 But alongside its work on the Sixth Carbon Budget, the Climate Change Committee  (CCC)9 
published an accompanying report in 2020 on the role of local authorities in delivering the 
                                                           
5 The estimates of the UK’s GHG emissions used as the baseline for monitoring the Climate Change Act net zero target include an d exclude 
specific activity. For mo re information:  
https://www.ons.gov.uk/economy/environmentalaccounts/articles/netzeroandthediffer entofficialmeasuresoftheuksgreenhousegasemissi
ons/2019 -07-24  
6 UK Government Ten Point Plan for a Green Industrial Revolution (November 2020)  
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/the -ten-point -plan -for-a-green -industrial -revolution/title#look -ahead -the-race -to-zero   
7UK Government Industrial Decarbonisation Strategy (March 2021)  
https://www.gov.uk/gove rnment/news/major -blueprint -to-create -green -jobs-and-slash -emissions -from -industry -schools -and-hospitals   
8 The Future Homes Standard was subject to public consultation in the first half of 2021:  
https://www.gov.uk/government/consultations/the -future -buildings -standard   
9 The Climate Change Committee (CCC) is an independent, statutory body established under the Climate Change Act 2008.  Its purp ose is 
to advise the UK and devolved governments on emissions targets and to report to Parliament on progress made in reducing greenhouse 
gas emissions and preparing for and adapting to the impacts of climate change.  UK’s net zero ambition10. The report comments that: “ Local authorities are directly 
responsible for between 2 - 5% of their local area’s emissions. However, local authorities have 
many levers that can be used to deliver wider local action to reduce emissions and prepare 
local areas for a changing climate.”   
 Local authorities are w ell placed to drive and influence action on climate change through the 
services they deliver, their regulatory and strategic functions, and their roles as community 
leaders, major employers, large -scale procurers and socia l landlords. They also provide an 
important leadership role, setting an example for others to follow.  
 At the same time, local authorities have to be  realistic and pragmat ic on what they can 
achieve. T he CCC report  commented  that: “ Local authorities are developing their plans and 
making pol icy and contract decisions now, which will remain in place during the 2020s and 
beyond, but they only have limited guidance as to how these decisions fit into a national 
strategy for meeting the UK’s Net Zero objectives. They cannot deliver effectively and  
efficiently without longer term policy and funding certainty to underpin investment decisions. 
Without some level of coordination from Government, the UK risks pursuing a fragmented 
strategy towards Net Zero. ” 
 
Swindon Borough Council context  
 In Swindon,  over 80% of the C ouncil’s total annual budget in 2021/22 will be spent on 
statutory services to support vulnerable residents including the elderly, the disabled and at -
risk children. The Council has a statutory duty  to deliver a balanced budget and will n eed to 
achieve £ 7.8m in savings in 2021/22 (5% of the Council’s net budget ). 
 Nevertheless, significant  existing  Council expendit ure on upgrading services will have a 
direct benefit i n reducing GHG emissions. This includes the ongoing £7.2m programme to 
convert around  28,000 of the Borough’s  street lights to more energy effi cient LED units . 
 The Council has a track record of seizing opportunities and taking action to reduce GHG 
emissions generated  through its operations. For example, in 2016 working with ethi cal 
investment company Abundance, the Council raised more than £4.2 million from the public 
to build solar energy with two public investment offers.  
 The first offer, to build the 4.8 MW Common Farm solar park, was the first council solar 
bond to be launche d in the UK. The second, to build the 5 MW Chapel Farm solar park, 
coincided with the launch of the Abundance ISA, making it the UK’s first ever ISA -eligible 
solar bond.  
 
Context for this first Net Zero Emissions Action Plan  
 In January 2020, the Council passed a motion11 that: “ Commits the Council to an 80 per cent 
reduction in the council`s corporate carbon emissions no later than 2030, striving towards 
100 per cent with carbon offsetting by the same date, with the aim of making the council’s 
estate and a ctivities net -zero carbon by 2030 .” 
 The Council has also taken the additional commitment to support the wider borough to 
transition to  net zero GHG emissions by 2050 . This was set out in the Carbon Redu ction 
Strategy12 approved by the Council’s Cabinet in F ebruary 2021, following public consultation 
on the draft strategy held between November 2020 and January 2021.  
                                                           
10 An independent report for the Climate Change Commi ttee: Local  Authorities and the Sixth Carbon Budget (December 2020)  
https://www.theccc.org.uk/wp -content/uploads/2020/12/Local -Authorities -and-the-Sixth -Carbon -Budget.pdf   
11 Council Agenda and Minutes - 23rd January 2020:  
 http://ww5. swindon.gov.uk/moderngov/ieListDocuments.aspx?CId=284&MId=9909   
12 Cabinet Agenda and Minutes - 3rd February 2021:  
https://ww5.swindon.gov.uk/moderngov/ieListDocumen ts.aspx?CId=285&MId=10130    For clarity an d consistency in our terminology , we are moving away from using “carbon 
reduction” and “carbon emissions”, to talk more precisely  about reducing all GHG emissions  
(measured in carbon dioxide equivalent , CO 2e).   
 This first iteration of the  Net Zero Emissions Plan  has been developed as climate change and 
net zero emissions rise u p the international and UK  political and policy agenda, in the run -up 
to COP26 in Glasgow.  
 This is a rapidly evolving field where, almost in real -time, local authorities are learning and 
assimilating new tools, approaches, knowledge and understanding to inform  their role and 
respon se. B eing ready to tap into new external funding opportunities as they arise to unlock  
implement ing further  actions to reduce emissions .  Accordingly, the Council will need to 
regularly review, reprioritise and  add actions to this plan.  
 Supported by the Local Government Association, the Association for Public Service 
Excellence and other bodies and initiatives , local authorities are at an early stage in 
developing the in -house capability and experience to baseline and measure the impact o f 
individual actions to reduce GHG emissions. Making progress in this area will clearly be 
integral to demonstratin g the quantifiable impact that the Council ’s efforts are having. 
However, it is yet to feature in the climate change actions plans of even th ose councils 
regarded as leaders in the field such as Nottingham City Council13.  
 
Key elements of this Net Zero Emissions Action Plan  
 This Action Plan makes a distinction between:  
1. Actions that will make a direct causal link in reducing GHG emissions; and  
2. Enabl ing actions which  once completed, should identify further opportunities to 
reduce GHG emissions which can either be implemented within existing operations 
or may be subject to securing new sources of funding.   
 
Progressing the Council’s organisational  target to reach net zero emissions by 2030  
This involves addressing three types of GHG emissions:  
o Scope 1  are direct GHG emissions from sourc es that we own or control as a C ouncil, 
for example emissions from fuel combustion (gas/oil boilers ) and council vehicles .  
o Scope 2  are indirect emissions from purchased electricity that we consume (e.g. 
streetlight, libraries, and offices).  
o Scope 3  are indirect emissions that we do not directly control, but we have some 
responsibility and influence ove r. Examples include : emissions gener ated from the 
energy usage of tenants living in our circa 10,000 social housing properties ; business 
travel, commuting, grey fleet (employee -owned cars cl aiming mileage back ); waste 
disposal for contracted out waste proc essing ; from wider supply chains (often 
reachin g international jurisdictions); emission s from the use of our services; 
contracted out services; leased assets; investments ; and p urchased goods and 
services . We have a strong influence over some of these emis sions and less over 
others.  
 
Our starting point: baseline Scope 1 emissions  
 The baseline figure for the Council’s directly managed and controlled emissions have been 
calculated using the most recent data available from the 2018/19 financial year, converting 
all outputs into a  carbon dioxide equivalent ( CO 2e) figure using UK Government GHG 
Conversion Fac tors for Company Reporting 2018.  
 
                                                           
13 Nottingham City Council: Carbon Neutral Nottingham 2020 –2028 Action Plan (June 2020)  
https://www.nottinghamcity.gov.u k/media/2619917/2028 -carbon -neutral -action -plan -v2-160620.pdf    
Scope 1 Emissions  (2018/19 baseline)  
Fuels  Comments  Tonnes of C0 2e 
Gas All direct council usage  3,033  
Including:   Waterside Park  645 
  Social Care Buildings  504 
  Offices  399 
  Museums and Libraries  383 
  Crematorium  226 
  Misc/other  876 
   
Heating Oil  Lydiard House  101 
 
Petrol  Fleet Operations  48 
Diesel  Fleet Operations  2,044  
Gas Oil  Fleet Operations  608 
 
 Scope 1 Emissions total  5,834  
  
 
 
Scope 2 Emissions  (2018/19 baseline)  
UK Electricity   Tonnes of C0 2e 
Electricity  All direct council usage  2,720  
Including:   Offices  449 
  Car parks  423 
  Museums and Libraries  372 
  Landlord Supplies  295 
  Misc/other  1,181  
 Street lighting  including Traffic signals 
etc. 3,269  
 
 Scope 2 Emissions total  5,989  Supporting Swindon Borough to  reach net zero emissions by 205 0 
 All Swindon Borough Council’s Scope 1,  2 and 3 GHG emiss ions are a subset of the total 
Borough figures.  
 Whilst the Council does not directly cont rol the wider emissions of the B orough, it can 
influence and support residents and organisations to contribute to the local effort.  
 The Council is able to monitor and measure the total em issions of the Borough.  
 
 Scope 1  Scope 2  Scope 3   
Sub-sector  Total 
tCO2e  Total 
tCO2e  Total 
tCO2e  Total tCO2e  
  DIRECT  INDIRECT  OTHER  TOTAL  
Residential buildings     
195,547.82     
121,848.80       
52,439.24     369,835.86  
Commercial buildings & 
facilities       
32,230.95       
27,911.35       
10,245.09       70,387.40  
Institutional buildings & 
facilities       
55,464.31     
141,041.91       
31,981.54     228,487.76  
Industrial buildings & facilities       
43,729.11       
81,759.39       
21,314.28     146,802.79  
Agriculture          
4,337.80                  
1.20          
1,035.39          5,374.39  
On-road     
406,681.73   IE     
105,111.98     511,793.71  
Rail         
2,617.76   IE             
624.16          3,241.91  
Aviation   NO   IE     
116,328.81     116,328.81  
Off-road          
4,066.82                      
-     NE          4,066.82  
Solid waste disposal       
40,079.09                      
-     IE       40,079.09  
Wastewater       
13,723.81                      
-     NO       13,723.81  
Industrial process       
19,132.19                      
-                         
-         19,132.19  
Livestock       
18,022.39                      
-                         
-         18,022.39  
Land use  -    
15,005.98                      
-                         
-    -    15,005.98  
CHP generation             
137.38                      
-                  
25.37             162.75  
Local renewable generation                  
5.84   NO                       
-                    5.84  
   TOTAL     1,532,439.54  
 
IE - Integrated Elsewhere  
NE - Not Estimated  
NO- Not Occurring  
*The emissions in this table cove r the entire Borough of SwindonOur organisation – progressing target to achieve net zero organisational emissions by 2030  
Scope 1 and 2 emissions: actions to reduce GHG emissions  
This section focuses  on actions to reduce the Council’s GHG emissions falling  under Scope 1 and Scope 2. Our Scope 1 direct emissions arise from sourc es that 
we own or control as a C ouncil, from directly burn ing fossil fuel, such as gas boilers used in our buildings and our vehicle fleet ( combustion engines ). Our  Scope 
2 emissions are generated from purchased electricity that we consume through Council -owned assets an d services such as street lighting , traffic signals  and 
buildings  operated across the Borough.  
 
      Actions o n progress to reduce Scope 1 & 2 emissions that contribute directly to our target of becoming a net zero organisation by 2030  
No. Action  Anticipated 
completion 
date  Estimated 
impact on 
Scope 1 
emissions  Estimated 
impact on 
Scope 2 
emissions  Officer 
sponsor  Commentary (including any impact on 
Scope 3 emissions)  
A1 Complete LED street lighting replacement 
programme (as of mid-June 2021: over 
14,200 of a total  28,000 lights  have been  
replaced)  Spring 2022  N/A High  Tim Price  Ongoing roll out subject to prioritisation of 
Highway Maintenance grant. The approach 
is to replace the most at risk  lamps and 
columns  each year.  
A2 Complete roll -out of LED traffic signals and 
signs replacements  
 December 
2021  N/A Low/Med  Mike Best  There are currently 206 traffic light sites in 
Swindon and 84 already operate with LEDs. 
Following this ongoing replacement 
programme, the remaining 55 ha logen bulb 
sites will be replaced, refurbished, altered or 
removed within the payback period or 
through other council programmes.  
A3 As part of the housing repair and 
maintenance works programme, continue 
LED replacement programme to install 
energy efficient lighting in communal areas  Ongoing  N/A Low Mike Ash  Target neighbourhood areas across the 
borough , will be identifi ed on an annual 
basis . In 2021/22, improvements will take 
place in Walcot East.  
A4 Continue LED lighting replacement across  
our corporate estate  Ongoing  N/A Low/Med  Rob Richards  Where existing lighting needs replacing LED 
will be the chosen technology.  
A5 Installation of a 1.2MW battery at our 
operations depot (Waterside Park) to End of 2021   N/A Low/Med  Mick Bowden  
(Giles Davis)  Funded through a successful SBC bid to UK 
Government’s Public Sector Decarbonisation compliment the direct wired solar  farm  Scheme. The battery will store c.402,000 
kWh of the excess generation each year 
from Barnfield Solar Farm that is currently 
sold t o the grid. This will be used instead to 
supply Waterside.  
A6 Purchase  of 15 ultra -low emissions vehicles 
(ULEVs) as part of the wider Council fleet 
replacement strategy  
 End of 2021  Low N/A Brian Pinchbeck 
(Ian McKinnon)  The purchase of 15 ULEV vehicles in 2021 is 
part of a phased approach to increase the 
number of ULEVs within the Council’s fleet. 
The rate replacement of petrol and diesel 
vehicles over time will increase year on year.  
A7 Conduct an annual review of the  waste 
collection routes to increase the efficiency 
of Council waste fleet journeys  Annually  Low  N/A Brian Pinchbeck  Use waste vehicle (diesel consumption) as 
the primary monitoring metric. This primarily 
mitigates emissions growth and informs 
reduction.  
A8 Continue the process of downsizing the 
corporate building estate   Ongoing  High  Medium/High  Sonia Grewal 
(Jim Catton)  By reducing the size of our estate and using 
our buildings more efficiently this will reduce 
Scope 1 &  2 emissions. However we need to 
be mindful that greater levels of 
homeworking will lead to a rise in Scope 3 
emissions.  
A9 Implement new post -pandemic Council 
working arrangements (e.g. agile working 
with more homeworking opportunities 
offered to employ ees)   Ongoing  High  High  Sonia Grewal  Reduction in number of journeys from home 
to work location. Reduction in energy 
consumption of Council owned buildings and 
assets . 
A10 Complete energy surveys to inform Heat 
Decarbonisation Plans for our corporate 
building estate (March -Sept 2021), 
focussing on those that don’t require access 
to additional  funding in the first instance  Dec 2021  Low Low Rob Richards 
(Giles Davis)  Funded through successful £70k SBC bid to 
UK Government’s Public Sector 
Decarbonisation  Scheme.  
 
 
 
Enabling actions to support future delivery of solutions to reduce Scope 1 & 2 emissions  No. Action  Anticipated 
completion 
date  Estimated 
impact on 
Scope 1 
emissions  Estimated 
impact on 
Scope 2 
emissions  Officer 
sponsor  Commentary (including any impact on 
Scope 3 emissions)  
B1 Roll-out utilities monitoring software to site 
and budget managers across the Council  March 2022  Low/Med  Low/Med  Sam Mowbray  
(Giles Davis)  This will aid visibility of energy 
performance, potentially leading to further 
reduction of emissions. This will also 
encourage greater ownership of 
consumption areas and increase awareness 
going forward . 
B2 Conduct an annual analysis to determine how 
the Council can purchase greater amounts of 
“green energy”   Annually  N/A Low/Med  Sam Mowbray  
(Giles Davis)  The primary focus of this is t o focus on the 
amount of Borough generated renewable 
energy that can be "sleeved" against our 
consumption . 
B3 Investigate opportunities to make further 
energy and emissions savings from the  LED 
programme through trialling the u se of Traffic 
Adapted Lighting  Ongoing  N/A Low/Med  Phil Murkin 
(Sarah Talbot )  Awaiting estimated savings from supplier  in 
order to be able to assess viability of 
running a proof of concept project.  
B4 Implementation  of the  fleet strategy to 
contribute to  the achievement of the  net zero 
emission target . For the 2021 period, leasing 
options will be explored to facilitate the 
acquisition of low emission vehicles in light of  
existing  capital replacement budgets  
 Ongoing  Low/Med  N/A Brian Pinchbeck  Fleet replacement needs to be in line with 
the financial plan signed off by Cabinet with 
any additional fleet requiring sign off as per 
the normal process. The cost of electric 
vehicles for some larger types of the fleet 
(i.e. waste vehicles)  could make the option 
to mov e to a 100% electric fleet cost 
prohibitive  alternatives routes to 
acquisition such as leasing are being 
considered.  
B5 When purchasing new  fleet vehic les, we will 
work towards the eventual transition of solely 
considering net zero market options  2025  Low/Med  N/A Brian Pinchbeck  
(Ian McKinnon)  We will work to  eventually phase out the 
purchase of petrol/diesel fleet vehicles. The 
rate at which we do this will be dependent 
on ULEV infrastructure and how ULEV 
technology develops to make the use of 
ULEV fleet practical.  B6 Install six  dual rapid charge points across the 
Borough to support Council ultra -low 
emissions fleet vehicles  By the e nd 
of 2021  Low N/A Brian Pinchbeck 
(Ian McKinnon)   
B6 Conduct a review of our local data centres, 
their size and their energy efficiency with a 
view to reconciling, consider use of cloud 
provision.  
 December 
2022  Low Low Sam Mowbray  
(Peter Eagle)  The intention is to move from two Swindon 
based data centres into one in Swindon and 
one in the cloud. This will reduce our local 
emissions and adopt state of the art cloud 
technology with a greener footprint.  
 
Scope 3 emissions: actions to reduce GHG emissions  
This section focuses indirect emissions that the Council does not directly control, but has some responsibility and influence over. Examples of Sc ope 3 
emissions includes those generated from the energy use of our tenants living in around  10,000 social housing properties, from  wider supply chains, emissions 
from the use of our services, contracted out services and investments.  
 
 
Actions in progress to reduce Scope 3 emissions that contribute directly to our target of becoming a net zero organisation by  2030  
 
No. Action  Anticipated 
completion 
date  Estimated 
impact on 
Scope 3 
emissions  Officer sponsor  Commentary  
C1  Explore how the Council can integrate energy 
efficiency methodologies into the capital 
works / maintenance programme within 
housing and sheltered h ousing stock  2026  High  Mike Ash  The Council manages c.10 ,000  properties across the 
Swindon Borough.  
C2 Through the Local Plan review, the Council will 
ensure that it adopts the most stringent 
practicable sustainable construction polices in 
line with our net zero  emissions  target  
 2021  Medium  Richard Bell  
(Kimberly Corps / 
Phil Smith )  
 
 Ensure that Local Plan policies are as stringent as they 
are permitted to be in moving as closely as we are able 
to net zero emissions in building design and 
construction. Local Plan scheduled for next round of 
public consultation in summer 2021.  
C3 Through the Local Plan review, the Council will 2021  Medium  Richard Bell Being implemented through the planning process. This require new developments to provide high 
biodiversity quality areas within the B orough 
as part of their proposals/ developments  
 (Kimberly Corps  
Phil Smith )  
 
 may include on site or off site mitigation or a financial 
contribution to biodiversity compensat ion elsewhere. 
This occurs under current policy and will continue to 
do so under strengthened Local Plan policies once 
adopted. Local Plan policy also requires mitigation for 
open space and Community Forest purposes.  
C4 Build nine eco -friendly houses as part of a new  
development in Highworth built by the 
Council’s housing development company  2022  Low Mike Ash/Adam 
Gatier  Delivered as part of a wider commitment to deliver a 
series of eco -friendly homes as part of new and 
existing housing developments delivered by the 
Council’s housing development company.  
C5 Provide i nfrastructure for 130 electric vehicle 
charging points and an initial 20 active 
charging sockets in shared and visitor parking 
bays to serve new housing developments in 
Wichelstowe  2021  Low - Medium  Rob Richards  The joint venture between Swindon Borough Council 
and Barratt Developments, which is delivering more 
than 3,000 new homes at Wichelstowe, collaborated 
with Connected Kerb - a UK -based smart cities and EV 
charging specialist to install the electric vehicle 
charging  infrastructure.  
C6  Install 11 double -headed on -street electric 
vehicle charging points (making a total of 22 
bays) across eight locations in the Central and 
Eastcott wards following resident input  2021  Low Claire Fleming  As of June 2021, 9 of the 11 charging points have been 
installed. The majority of the funding for the 22 
charging bays came from central government while 
the rest will come from the Council.  
C7 Update procurement process to ensure 
suppliers minimise the use of single -use 
plastics across all Council operations  Ongoing  Low Mick Bowden  
(James Short)  
 
 All SBC standard tender templates to include a 
contract obligation to minimise the use of single use 
plastics and encourage elimination of these within the 
supply chain. The use of existing frameworks’ 
contracts and collaboration may restrict a full 
deployment in the first instance. This will need to form 
part of each service area’s contract management 
activities going forward.  
 
Enabling actions to support f uture delivery of actions to  reduce Scope 3 emissions  
No. Action  Anticipated 
completion 
date  Estimated impact 
on Scope 3 
emissions  Officer 
sponsor  Commentary  
D1 The Council’s Housing Company will work By 2025  Low (with Mike Ash All new SHC Housing construction will aim  for EPC rating A towards all suitable market housing 
construction projects being designed to 
provide an Energy Rating of A by 2025  medium 
potential)  /Adam Gatier  
 where possible and B at a minimum and look to move 
towards a Net Zero Carbon Housing Model and supported 
through the SHC business plan.  
D2  Investigate establishing a community 
interest company to perform residential 
home energy audits and support initiatives 
around retrofitting to improve energy 
efficiency  2021  Low  Mick Bowden  
(Giles Davis)  
  
D3 Identify opportunities for using renewable 
technologies to replace conventional options 
across our existing housing stock  Ongoing  Low Mike Ash  This will include pilot schemes to test renewable 
technologies such as heat pumps and triple glazing in new 
area s across the Borough.  
D4 Conduct a pilot study involving Council 
owned housing stock within the Swindon’s 
Railway Village to determine feasibility of 
energy solutions in the area  2023  Low Mike Ash   
D5 Present and have a preference for the low 
emissions  option in consideration of new 
Swindon Borough Council building projects  2025  Medium  Nick 
Kemmett/ 
Julian Sadler  Stage one present costing for zero emissions in operation. 
Stage two to present net zero emissions option including 
mitigation costs.  
D6 Work with developers before new sites 
across the Borough are approved to ensure 
that opportunities for energy efficiency and 
emission reduction are maximised  Ongoing  Medium  Dave Dewart/ 
Kimberly 
Corps  This is being implemented through the planning process.  
Developers will need to ensure that their schemes meet 
appropriate criteria including the use of renewable energy 
as a priority and minimising journeys by private car. 
Secured by condition of contribution through legal 
agreement.  
D7 Review the Council’s current housing stock 
to determine baseline efficiency (SAP and 
EPC)  2021 -2022  Low direct impact 
but will inform 
future focus areas 
and decision 
making  Mike Ash  The Council manages c.10,000  properties. The review will 
highlight focus areas for raising efficiency levels. A 
member of staff has been employed to help with this task.  
Current stock EPC data is available but will require 
continual validation. Initial data review complete April 21,  
working group to be established to formulate business 
plan.  D8 Use new external  guidance to measure 
emissions from services run on behalf of the 
council (e.g. social care provi sion, leisure 
centres) to identify potential  opport unities 
for reduction  Ongo ing  Low/Medium  Sam Mowbray  As example, guidance is being made available in 2021 for 
councils on measuring and monitoring Scope 3 GHG 
emissions from social care provision.  
D9 Produce pilot projects, business cases and 
identify funding sources to implement  
identified energy opportunities across the 
Council’s estate  2021 -26  Low (impact 
dependant on 
scale and funding)  Mike Ash  Blend funding and grant opportunities where available to 
undertake Green Homes Grant work and to fund pilot 
surveys.  
D10 Introduce s taff climate change training, 
particularly equipping those staff with the 
knowledge to identify and implement 
actions to reduce organisational emissions 
within their role  January 2022  Low Sonia Grewal  
(Becky 
Clinton ) This will include equipping staff with the knowledge and 
tools to measure and monitor the emissions footprint of 
their work areas, as well as to identify opportunities to 
measurably reduce this.  
D11  Introduce climate change training for 
borough councill ors, also made available to 
parish councillors  January 2022  Low  Sonia Grewal  
(Becky 
Clinton)  In the interim, there are external resources Local 
Governm ent Association’s ‘A councillor’s workbook on the 
local pathway to net zero ’ (April 2021) .14  
D12 Educate staff on workplace volunteering 
opportunities and encourage staff take up 
volunteering projects that reduce GHG 
emissions (e.g. tree planting)  By the end of 
2021  Low Sonia Grewal  
(Becky Clinton 
& Helena 
Robinson)  All SBC staff are able to use up to  two paid days a year  on 
volunteering support in the Borough. The uptake and 
engagement with this initiative will be monitored.  
 
 
 
 
Swindon Borough  – support ing residents and organisations to transition to net zero by 2050  
                                                           
14 Local Government Association ‘A councillor’s workbook on the local pathway to net zero’ (April 2021)  
https://www.local.gov.uk/publications/councillor -workbook -acting -climate -change#:~:text=This%20workbook%20is%20a%20learning,build%20resilience%20to%20extreme %20weather .  Our role is to help increase and accelerate the existing efforts of Swindon residents and organisations to take action to  reduce their emissions. Our effort and 
finite resources working locally will be targeted, complementing the evolving UK policy and reg ulatory landscape that will realistically do much of the heavy 
lifting in  moving society  to more sustainable lifestyles, behaviour and choices . For example, the UK Government has committed to end the sale of new petrol 
and diesel cars in the UK by 203 0, with all vehicles being required to have a significant zero emissions capability (for example plug -in and full hybrids) from 
2030 and be 100% zero emissions from 203515.  
 
This section firstly looks at current actions being led by the Council to support the whole of Swindon Borough  to move toward s achieving  net zero emissions by 
2050 , before looking at enabling actions to support residents and organisations in their efforts to reduce emissions.   
 
Actions in progress to  support the reduction of  wider Borough emissions  
No. Action  Anticipated 
completion date  Officer sponsor  Commentary  
E1 350 hectares of woodland being planted 
across the Great Western Community Forest 
over the five -year period of the programme 
– approx. 500,000 trees in total  2025   Dave Dewart / Carol 
Bristow  With the town of Swindon at its heart, the Forest covers over 
168 square miles, stretching from the North Wessex Downs to 
the River Thames. An initial £12m of grant funding for the first 
planting session in 2020/21 was s ecured from the UK 
Government’s Nature for Climate fund. Just over 18 hectares of 
new woodland and trees planted by the end of March 2021 – 
equating to around 20,000 trees.   
E2 Work in partnership to develop  
proposals for large scale habitat creation 
projects and secure funding to deliver 
schemes that can sequester carbon  
 Ongoing  Kimberly Corps / Phil 
Smith  
 Implemented through the planning process and also though 
enactment of Cabinet decision on the identification and future 
management of the Distric t Level Licensing Project for Great 
Crested Newts. Ecological mitigation and net gain is required of 
all applicable development proposals . 
E3  Provide free energy/ heating advice to 
Borough residents through the Warm & Safe 
Wiltshire Advice Service   
 March 2022  Mike Ash  Funding is currently committed (via SBC Public Health) to end of 
March 2022 when the current contract for Warm & Safe 
Wiltshire Advice Service will end.  Swindon Public Health and 
Wiltshire Council Public Health to discuss future plans t o follow 
this (as a joint initiative).    
                                                           
15 UK Government Ten Point Plan for a Green Industrial Revolution (November 2020)  
  UK Government Ten Point Plan for a Green Industrial Revolution (November 202 0)   E4 Provide f ree energy efficiency training to 
eligible residents provided by Adult 
Community Learning service  Late 2021  Rachel Loxston  
 Adult Community Learning colleagues will expand delivery of this 
throughout 20 21.  
 
 
Enabling actions to support future reduction of wider Borough emissions  
No. Action  Anticipated 
completion date  Officer sponsor  Commentary  
F1 Deliver ‘Be the change’ climate change 
communications campaign in Swindon to 
raise the profile of the net zero agenda, 
engaging residents and organisations  December 2021 (first 
phase)  Sam Mowbray  
(Phil Avery)  Campaign will focus on the action residents and organisations 
can take – signposting information, tools and resources to help 
them reduce their emissions footprint. For example, signposting 
the Government’s Target 203016 initiative which provides free 
energy -saving support and grant funding for Swindon . SMEs. A 
new climat e change section will be created on the SBC website.  
F2  Host a Swindon community event as part of 
the Government’s UK -wide COP26 Zero 
Carbon Tour  September 2021  Sam Mowbray  
(Phil Avery)  This event forms part of a national UK Government initiative to 
sign up 100,000+ businesses to the UN Race to Zero Campaign in 
the build up to COP26. This will include a workshop to give local 
organisations, particularly micro businesses (between 1 and 9 
employees) tools and resources to help them on the journey to 
achieve net zero emissions.  
F3 Identify opportunities to support the 
Swindon and Wiltshire Local Enterprise 
Partnership’s (SWLEP) work to progress the 
Government’s Industrial Decarbonisation 
Strategy and Ten Point Plan for a green 
industrial revolution  August 2021  Dave Dewart  
(Rob Fulford)  The SWLEP has identified emissions reduction as a strategic 
priority of the Local Industrial Strategy, particularly the 
development of a Low Carbon Tourism Zone across wider 
Wiltshire.  
F4 Continued delivery of projec ts in the Local 
Cycling And Walking Infrastructure Plan Ongoing from July 
2021  Syed Shah  LCWIP infrastructure to be delivered subject to funding. In 
addition Moredon Sports Hub is being developed with its focus 
                                                           
16 UK Government ‘ Target 2030 ’:  
https://target2030.co.uk/   (LCWIP) to improve walking and cycling 
across the Borough  as a regional cycling facility.  
F5 Develop and implement an Electric Vehicle 
(EV) Strategy to encourage borough wide use 
of ultra -low emission vehicles (ULEVs)  
 July 2021 onwards  Syed Shah  This will provide the foundations for reducing Sco pe 3 emissions 
from Borough -wide traffic and inform the planning policy review 
through the Local Plan to secure additional EV charging points at 
domestic and commercial locations. Supplementary Planning 
Policy already approved.  
F6 Develop and implement a new taxi licence 
policy to encourage and incentivise existing 
Hackney and Private Hire Taxi Vehicles 
to purchase Low Emissions alternatives.  April 2022  Kate Bishop 
(Kathryn Ashton)  
 This will assist with the reduction of taxi fleet emissions across 
the Swindon borough, reducing the number of petrol and diesel 
taxis in operation.  
F7 Work in partnership with Greenwich Leisure 
Ltd (GLL) and SBC’s other leisure partners to 
provide access to funding efficiency 
improvements to leisure facilities  Ongoing  Rob Richards / David 
Dewart  The Council has £6.5m of funding to refurbish the Hydro and is 
working with Seven Capital to upgrade the Oasis. SBC is also 
progressing the creation of Moredon Sports Hub, regional sports 
provision in partnership with Sport England.  
F8 Work in partnership with our tenant farmers 
to increase the biodiversity potential of their 
farmland through land use diversification and 
alternative planting regimes  Ongoing  Rob Richards / David 
Dewart  Work is ongoing to identify areas of tenanted farmland and other 
SBC own land available for tree planting using the funding it has 
secured for the Great Western Community and as part of the UK 
Government’s Trees for Climate  project.  
F9 Work in collaboration with local colleges to 
identify current and future skills gaps within 
the climate change / emissions reduction 
field  March 2022 and 
ongoing thereafter  Sally Burnett  Identifying skills gaps to support GHG emissions reduc tions is 
part of the Swindon and Wiltshire Local Enterprise Partnership 
(LEP) - wide Skills Plan. We will identify skills gaps through the 
Skills and Talent Sub Group.  
F10 Conduct an audit of the current carbon 
reduction activities that are taking place in 
Swindon Schools via Healthy Schools leads  2021  Su Rai /  
Claire Fleming  We will audit the current position of work around this subject 
and understand the next steps and provisions required to 
develop this work further in schools.  
 
 
 
 
 
Quantifying and monitoring progress in delivering this Action Plan   As part of delivering the actions in this plan, we will develop a monitoring and performance framework to assess progress aga inst our 2030 
organisational net zero ambition.  
 This will invo lve quantifying as far as possible the impact of  existing, planned and potential future actions on reducing the baseline of our s cope 1, 2 
and 2 emissions. We will also monitor  the delivery of the enabling actions in this plan and how these lead  to identif ying further opportunities to reduce 
GHG emissions which can either be implemented within existing operations or may be subject to securing new funding.   
 Developing such a framework is a new territory for the whole of local government, particularly linked to the ambition to support Swindon as borough 
to achieve net zero emissions by 2050. We will tap into emerging methodologies a nd approaches to understand how we can robust baseline whole 
borough emissions and quantify progress along the  reduction journey.  
 
Governance  
 The Cabinet Member for Climate Change, Finance and Commercialisation  will also attend a monthly senior officer meeting where progress against the 
delivery of this Action Plan will be discussed and monitored. Here the Action will be regularly  review ed, actions added  and/or reprioritise d to take into 
account evolving best practice, sector innovatio n and new funding opportunities (e.g. Public Sector Decarbonisation Scheme ).   
 It is proposed that an updated Action Plan wil l be tabled  at Cabinet annually, also reporting on progress on  reducing our emissions against the 
baselines for Scope 1, 2 and 3 set out earlier in this plan.  
 
Resource  
 The Council is in the process of recruiting a Climate Change Manager to provide full time, dedicated resource to coordinating the delivery of this plan 
working with the officers identified against each action.   
 
 
 
July 2021  