 
Page 1 of 9 
 
Our Climate Change Action Plan – Strategic Priorities  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3. Energy Generation  
 Expand renewable energy generation capacity across the District.     
 Develop localised smart energy systems that focus on providing low carbon energy to local businesses and residents, whilst 
reducing costs.       2. Transport and Air Quality  
 Taking forward our Place -based approach to development that creates well -connect communities close to high quality places 
and spaces which reduces the need for private vehicles.        
 Promote and encourage a shift away from private transport vehicles to a n increased uptake of accessible public and active 
transport (walking and cycling).    
 Create an innovative policy environment, supported by adequate funding, that encourages the uptake of zero emission vehicles 
amongst partners and residents for journeys that cannot be made on foot, by bicycle or public transport.    
  1. Organisational Emissions  
 Use net zero carbon energy across our Council -owned buildings, and over the longer term look to transition to net -zero carbon 
buildings. We will also reduce our orga nisational waste to a minimum.  
 All council -owned vehicles to be zero carbon by 2030 or sooner.      
 Utilise our influence across our supply chain, through procurement practices, to drive significant carbon emission reductions in 
the operations of our suppliers and partners.   
 Enable Council staff and Councillors to support reducing our organisational emissions.       
  
Page 2 of 9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4. Housing, Buildings, Planning and Infrastructure  
 Seek and support the retrofit of existing residential homes and commercial buildings to more demanding energy efficiency 
standards.       
 Review  and update local planning policy frameworks, as well as seeking a stronger National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF), to 
ensure our planning policies support our commitment to climate change. For example: facilitating the delivery of low -carbon, 
energy ef ficient new residential development that produces a net -gain in biodiversity, improves air quality, and produces 
infrastructure that enables the delivery of wider ambitions on local renewable energy generation, vehicle electrification, an d is 
sustainably l ocated to allow safe and easy access for residents to existing services and transport hubs.       
 Work with stakeholders to develop a systems -based approach to development and infrastructure that considers the whole -life 
cycle of construction including wate r consumption and promotes the integration of green infrastructure for climate change 
adaptation.       
5. Waste, Resources and Circular Economy  
 Work with other government authorities and businesses to strengthen producer responsibility and practical, innovative and 
effective methods guidance for consumers to reduce waste generated, particularly food.       
 Use education and best practice sharing to drive significant behaviour change within the District and the adoption of more 
sustainable pur chasing practices.     
 Where waste is produced, we will work with partners to develop practical, innovative and effective methods for increasing reu se 
and recycling rates. We will also evaluate the current carbon impact of recycling collection and disposal practices so that their 
impact can be lessened e.g. electrification of vehicles.            
Page 3 of 9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7. Industry and Green Economy  
 Utilise digital technology and develop relevant skills amongst our workforce to support the creation of green technologies, jobs 
and products in the District.     
 Pursue energy efficiency improvements in local industry and businesses that reduce consumption and decarbonise energy usage.
   6. Land Use and Food Systems  
 Working with the agricultural industries, partners and research groups to promote sustainable localised food systems within t he 
District.       
 Increase the potential of the district's land, biodiversity, current and future woodland to sequester and capture carbon, and  to 
strengthen resilience to climate change.    
 Greater learning and sharing of approaches to reduce carbon in our f ood consumption patterns through our procurement 
practices and within our communities.      
9. Adaption  
 We will work with partners, employees, and our supply chain to build the resilience of our estate(s) to climate change impacts, in 
particular flooding and extreme heat.    
 Take a proactive approach to working with partners in planning to strengthen the integration of climate change adaptation and  
holistic thinking into development proposal s to build long -term resilience to climate change.      
          8. Funding, Engagement & Other Actions  
 Pro-actively seek funding for climate change i nitiatives.       
 Support climate friendly behaviour change.       
 Explore all areas that the Council can create positive impacts on climate change.        
   
Page 4 of 9 
 
Our Climate Change Action Plan  
April 2021 – March 20301  
Action Priorities  
1 – High Red action  (following scoping)  anticipated to substantially reduce carbon emissions  
2 – Medium  Amber  action  (following scoping)  anticipated  to moderately reduce carbon emissions  
3 – Low Green  action  (following scoping)  anticipated to result in minor reduc tion in  carbon emissions  
Mitigation   action anticipated to help adapt to future impacts of climate change  
Offsetting   action anticipated to help offset carbon emissions  
 
Please note: ‘Completed by’ timescales are initial estimates.  
Category 1: Reducing emissions from the Council’s  estate and operations  
Initial Action  Strategic Priority  Change Outcome  Action Priority  Completed by  
Produce Council greenhouse gas emissions 
report to ensure we are effectively measuring 
and managing our emissions.  Organisational 
Emissions  Reduce, and effectively manage 
organisational emissions.  1 Mar 2021 (first 
iteration)  
Switch the Council’s supply to a ‘green’ tariff 
that guarantees energy from renewable sources  Organisational 
Emissions  Reduce organisational emissions.  1 Mar 2022  
Undertake a zero -carbon pathway and 
feasibility assessment  for the  Council Offices  Organisational 
Emissions  Reduce organisational emissions.  1 Mar 2021  
Undertake a zero -carbon pathway and 
feasibility assessment  for the  Warren Lane 
Depot  Organisational 
Emissions  Reduce organisational emissions.  1 Mar 2022  
Undertake a zero -carbon pathway and 
feasibility assessment  for the  Council’s housing 
stock  Organisational 
Emissions  Reduce organisational emissions.  1 Mar 2022  
                                                           
1 Year 1 = date of plan approval to end March 2022, Year 2 = April 2022 – March 2023, Year 3 = April 2023 – March 2024 etc.   
Page 5 of 9 
 
Initial Action  Strategic Priority  Change Outcome  Action Priority  Completed by  
Develop a business case for all Council vehicles 
to be powered by electric or other low carbon 
alternatives  Organisational 
Emissions  Reduce organisational emissions.  1 Jun 2024  
Produce new procurement strategy which 
embodies social value climate change principles  Organisational 
Emissions  - Reduce organisational emissions.  
- Support behaviour change in 
value chain.  1 Mar 2021  
Scope potential to enable residents/public to 
make voluntary contributions (£) to the 
Council’s climate change projects  Funding, 
Engagement & Other 
Actions  - Enable a greater number of 
projects to take place over a 
shorter timescale.  
- Support behaviour change.  
 2 Mar 2022  
Scope Council staff to use active travel or low -
carbon transport to commute to work  Organisational 
Emissions  - Reduce organisational emissions.  
- Support behaviour change.  3 Mar 2022  
Arrange  staff and councillor climate change 
training  Organisational 
Emissions  - Reduce organisational emissions.  
- Support behaviour change.  3 July 2021  
Scope reducing  water consumption across the 
Council  Organisational 
Emissions  - Reduce organisational emissions.  3 Mar 2023  
Scope r educ ing the volume of paper purchased 
across the Council  Organisational 
Emissions  - Reduce organisational emissions.  3 Mar 2023  
Review the Council’s financial investments to 
ascertain whether they support fossil fuel 
intensive industries  Funding, 
Engagement & Other 
Actions  - Reduce organisational emissions.  
- Support behaviour change.  
- Potential to increase R eturn On 
Investment . 3 July 2021  
Scope the Council’s organisational  waste 
generated from all its activities (e.g. grounds 
maintenance & housing repairs)  Organisational 
Emissions  - Reduce organisational emissions.  3 Mar 2024  
Scope emissions offsetting options for the 
Council (e.g. for IT cloud services)  Organisational 
Emissions  - Offset emissions that cannot 
effectively be reduced via current 
opportunities , hence reduce 
organisational emissions.  Offsetting  Mar 2025  
Scope carbon sequestratio n opportunities in 
the District (inc. tree strategy & canopy survey)  Land Use & Food 
Systems  - Reduce carbon emissions in 
District.  Offsetting  Mar 2023   
Page 6 of 9 
 
Initial Action  Strategic Priority  Change Outcome  Action Priority  Completed by  
- Increase biodiversity.  
- Improve District's air quality . 
Ensure our business continuity and emergency 
plans are robust from a climate change 
perspective  Adaption  - Increase Council’ s climate 
resilience.  Mitigation  Mar 2022  
 
Category 2: How the Council  can influence and encourage residents and businesses to reduce their emissions  
 
Actions  Strategic Priority  Change Outcome  Action Priority  Completed by  
Scope feasibility of i nstall ing Electric Vehicle 
(EV) charging infrastructure in the District  Transport & Air 
Quality  - Reduce carbon emissions in 
District.  
- Improve District's air quality . 
- Support low -income/vulnerable -
households or those who may not 
have access to private chargers.  
- Support behaviour change.  1 Mar 2021  
Scope how the Council can support community 
energy schemes  Energy Generation  - Reduce fuel poverty in the District  
- Reduce carbon emissions in 
District.  2 Mar 2025  
Produce climate change communications plan 
(e.g. Council website, single -use plastics, low 
carbon advertising, zero waste, AONBs)  Funding, 
Engagement & Other 
Actions  - Support behaviour change.  
 2 Mar 2021  
Work with Southern Building Control and other 
Council teams to review implications of new 
government updates to building control, NPPF, 
Council planning polices, and other green 
building standards.  Housing, Planning, 
Buildings & 
Infrastructure  - Reduce carbon emissions in 
District.  
 2 Ongoing   
Page 7 of 9 
 
Actions  Strategic Priority  Change Outcome  Action Priority  Completed by  
Explore wo rking more closely with landlords to 
undertake energy efficiency improvements in 
their properties  Housing, Planning, 
Buildings & 
Infrastructure  - Reduce carbon emissions in 
District.  
- Reduce fuel poverty.  2 Mar 2022  
Scope working with farmers to reduce their 
carbon footprint  Land Use & Food 
Systems  - Reduce carbon emissions in 
District.  
- Increase biodiversity.  2 Sep 2024  
Scope how the Council can support upskilling 
the District’s workforce in the green economy  Industry & Green 
Economy  - Support local e conomy.  
- Reduce carbon emissions in 
District.  2 Sep 2022  
Scope options for how the Council can engage 
with young residents on climate change  Funding, 
Engagement & Other 
Actions  - Support behaviour change.  
 3 Sep 2021  
Revise our taxi policies to encourage the uptake 
of EVs  Transport & Air 
Quality  - Improve District's air quality . 
- Support behaviour change.  
- Save operational costs (long -
term) . 3 Dec 2022  
Scope possibilities for improving active travel in 
the District  Transport & Air 
Quality  - Improve District's air quality . 
- Reduce carbon emissions in 
District.  
- Improve users’ health & 
wellbeing.  3 Dec 2023  
Produce a Green and Blue infrastructure 
Supplementary Planning Document  in line with 
Our Local Plan  Housing, Planning, 
Buildings & 
Infrastructure  - Support behaviour change.  
 3 Mar 2025  
Evaluate use of business rates to drive more 
rapid adoption of energy efficiency upgrades  
and sustainable practices  Housing, Planning, 
Buildings & 
Infrastructure  - Reduce carbon emissions in 
District.  
- Support behaviour change.  
 3 Sep 2022  
Audit recycling sites and ability for residents to 
recycle the ‘unrecyclables’ in the District  Waste, Resources 
and Circular 
Economy  - Reduce carbon emissions in 
District.  3 Dec 2025   
Page 8 of 9 
 
Actions  Strategic Priority  Change Outcome  Action Priority  Completed by  
Explore implications of best practice policies 
that highlight the importance of food growing 
spaces (as per Open Space Strategy)  Land Use & Food 
Systems  - Reduce carbon emissions in 
District.  
- Support behaviour change.  
- Improve health and wellbeing.  3 Dec 2022  
Scope how the Council  can support schools to 
build climate change networks and install 
climate change infrastructure  Funding, 
Engagement & Other 
Actions  - Support behaviour change.  
- Reduce carbon emissions in 
District.  
 3 Dec 2025  
Assess opening Tandridge Lottery and 
Community Fund to support climate change 
projects/good causes in the District  Funding, 
Engagement & Other 
Actions  - As per project.  
- Enable a greater number of 
projects to take place.  3 Mar 2021  
 
Category 3: How we work with other agencies to collectivel y reduce  the carbon footprint of Surrey  
 
Actions  Strategic Priority  Change Outcome  Action Priority  Completed by  
Work with S urrey County Council  and J oint 
Waste Solutions  to fully assess emissions from 
the County’s / District’s waste collection and 
processing  Waste, Resources 
and Circular 
Economy  - Reduce carbon emissions in 
District.  2 Mar 2022  
Support the Surrey Air Alliance with their action 
plan  Transport & Air 
Quality  - Support behaviour change.  
- Improve District's air quality . 2 Ongoing  
Scope installation of renewable energy 
generators in the District (e.g. battery storage, 
wind, solar) in the District  Energy Generation  - Support renewable energy 
production /  distribution.  
- Reduce carbon emissions in 
District.  
- Support future EV fleet vehicles.  2 Mar 2023  
Work with partners to support the installation 
of smart meters in the District and  residents 
switch ing to ‘green’ energy tariffs  Housing, Planning, 
Buildings & 
Infrastructure  - Reduce carbon emissions in 
District.  
- Support behaviour change.  2 Sep 2023   
Page 9 of 9 
 
Actions  Strategic Priority  Change Outcome  Action Priority  Completed by  
- Support national energy network 
to become more flexible and adapt 
to on -boarding more renewables.  
Scope working with the County’s car club 
operator (or similar)  Transport & Air 
Quality  - Support behaviour change.  
- Improve District's air quality . 
- Reduce carbon emissions in 
District.  
 3 Sep 2025  
Scope installation of urban ‘greening’ devices 
(e.g. air -purifying benches, green walls, green 
roofs)  Housing, Planning, 
Buildings & 
Infrastructure  - Improve District's air quality . 
- Reduce ‘urban heat island’ effect.  
- Increase biodiversity.  
- Storm weather mitigation.  
- Improve health and wellbeing.  
- Dust suppression.  
- Noise reduction.  
- Passive therm al insulation and 
weather protection for buildings.  3 Dec 2023  
Work with partners to scope potential for low 
emission zones  Housing, Planning, 
Buildings & 
Infrastructure  - Improve District's air quality . 
- Support local economy by 
creating ‘destinations’.  
- Increase biodiversity (e.g. pocket 
parks).  
- Encourage active travel.  3 Sep 2026  
Pro-actively monitor UK Government policy re: 
hydrogen infrastructure  Energy Generation  - Support uptake of low -carbon 
alternatives in the District / 
nationally.  3 Ongoing  
Work with partners to implement key flood 
alleviation schemes where possible  Adaption  - Increase District’s climate 
resilience.  Mitigation  Ongoing  
 