Telford and W rekin
Action PlanBecoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutralTelford & Wrekin Council
Protect, Care and Invest
to create a better boroughAnnual update 2021Action Plan Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral2
Action Plan Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral3Scope
 
The Council declared a Climate Emergency on 25th July 2019. As part of the response to this, the Council has committed to 
ensuring that its operations and activities are carbon neutral by 2030. This action plan, updates the actions that the Council has 
taken to reduce its carbon footprint and also details new actions which are being put in place to deliver further improvements. The 
Action Plan is a living document which will continue to be updated as data, funding, best practice and national policy develops.
Section Page
Scope 3
Our Journey to date 4
What is counted as the Council’s operations and processes? 8
 Corporate estate 8
 Street lighting 8
 Transport and travel 8
Measuring our carbon emissions 8
Monitoring 9
Borough-wide 9
Telford & Wrekin Council Becoming carbon neutral Action Plan 2021/22 10
 Council buildings 10
 Borough buildings 15
 Council transport 17
 Borough transport 20
 Borough housing 22
 Council street lighting 27
 Borough finance/grants 28Section Page
 Council finance/grants 29
 Council Energy 29
 Communications and engagement 32
 Council Planning Policy 38
 Borough Planning Policy 39
 Council corporate 40
 Communications and training 44
 Council resources/waste 45
 Borough resources/waste 46
 Council land use, biodiversity and carbon sequestration 48
 Borough land use, biodiversity and carbon sequestration 54
Asks of Government 57Action Plan Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral4Our Journey to date
The Council has made good progress in reducing emissions 
from the Council’s operations, with a 36% decrease in 2019/20 
compared to the previous baseline year.  This is as result of 
successfully implementing a wide range of carbon reduction 
measures, key achievements over the last 12 months are 
highlighted in the following figure: Steps in 2020
towards Becoming Carbon Neutral
 20
01
03
0502
04
06Solar panels and LED lighting
fitted (8 projects complete, 8 in progress)
(Enhanced) green electricity tariff  
for Council buildings and schools
Cycle 2 work scheme£1.3m funding for heat pumps  and 
better insulated buildings
174 new cycle stands
across Telford and Wrekin6 new electric vansC02e SAVING 268 tonnes
C02e SAVING 1,252 tonnes*
C02e SAVING 16.5 tonnes
*approximate C0 2e savingC02e SAVING 800 tonnes*
C02e SAVING 6 tonnes per annumAction Plan Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral507
0908
10New
natural cooling system
for our datacentre
46 Nuplace homes
being built with solar panels
and charging pointsOver 1,400 employees home-working  
saving on printing and travel
2,400 computers replaced with laptops
using 80% less electricity
11
12More than 500 additional 
LED street lights , 
99% of lights now converted recycling services
saved 20,000+ tonnes of emissions 
equivalent to 10,000 cars off the road
13
14£100k of community grants  
for climate change projects4,000 engagements with climate change 
social media posts, including more than 
2,000 suggestions from 
residents
* approximate C0 2e saving
a compared to conventional air conditioning
b since April 2017 compared to 2016/17 benchmark
c Compared to the 151,448 miles of business mileage claim by staff in April 2019, 
staff claimed approximately half this amount, 76,203 miles, in April 2020.C02e SAVING 60 tonnes per unita
C02e SAVING Printing: 5.2 tonnes per month*
C02e SAVING Mileagec: 22 tonnes per monthc
C02e SAVING 200 tonnes
C02e SAVING 7,414 tonnesbAction Plan Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral6We recognise that to achieve the 2030 target we have to go further.15
17
1916
18
20New
Climate Change Champion 
volunteers
More than 8,600 free trees
for residents and organisations
Storing carbon by
planting species-rich
grasslandTelford & Wrekin
Climate Change Partnership 
set up  with 33 organisations involved
New
Telford Energy Advice service  
for residents
Food waste recycling
in Council offices C02e SAVING 9 tonnes C02 storage
C02e SAVING 1.25 tonnes C02  per month*
*approximate C0 2e savingAction Plan Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral7The actions set out in our plan on page 10 onwards 
identify the further opportunities we have identified 
to reduce carbon emissions relating to the Council’s 
operations and activities. The Council will continue 
to engage with staff, contractors and stakeholders 
to expand the plan and the range of actions that 
help us to meet our target.
Councillor Carolyn Healy, Cabinet Member for Visitor Economy, Historic & 
Natural Environment and Climate Change, with one of the Council’s new 
electric vans.Action Plan Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral8What is counted as the Council’s operations and processes?
Corporate estate 
Including: Abraham Darby Leisure, Addenbrooke House, Darby House, 78 -81 
Dodmoor temporary accommodation, Arthog, Bishton Court Unit 1, Crescent 
Road Changing Rooms, Doseley Pavilion, Edgmond Pavilion, Hartshill Pavilion, 
Herbert Avenue Changing Rooms, Horsehay Golf, The Wharfage Public Toilets, 
Ketley Bank Changing Rooms, Ketley Brook Travellers Site, Lakewood Court 
C011, Lakewood Court C036, Leegomery Changing Rooms, Madeley 3g 
Pitch, Madeley Library, New Activity Hub, Newport Library, Newport Leisure, 
Oakengates Bandstand, Oakengates Leisure, Oakengates Theatre (The Place), 
Overdale Community Centre, Shukers Field Changing Rooms, Southwater 
One, Stafford Park 11 Unit B4, Sutton Hill Changing Rooms, Sutton Hill 
Children’s Centre, Market Square Public Toilets, Telford Ski Centre, Telford Ice 
Rink, Tibberton Sports Pavilion, Unit 5 Leegomery Centre, Wellington Chapel 
of Rest, Wellington Civic & Leisure.   Street lighting
Transport and travel
Including vehicles: 
 owned by staff and miles claimed carrying out their duties; 
 owned by the Council and used by staff on Council duties;
 owned by staff getting to and from work;
 And Wrekin Rider miles.
Measuring our carbon emissions
Since the baseline year of 2018/19, Telford & Wrekin Council’s carbon 
emissions have reduced by approx. 2,903 tonnes CO2e (36%) from 7,958 
tonnes CO2e to 5,055 tonnes CO2e in 2019/20.
The Action Plan includes values for carbon reduction for actions where 
these can be calculated at this point in order to plot our journey to 
carbon neutral.    It is important to note that these figures are based on a range of 
sources and best available information. We will continue to develop and 
strengthen our data including engaging with our contractors, suppliers 
and Council Teams.Action Plan Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral9Monitoring
The Action Plan is a live document that is owned by the Council’s Cabinet and 
Senior Management Team (SMT). The Action Plan is monitored by the Council’s 
Climate Change Working Group and Coordinator. They provide monthly 
progress updates to the lead Director and Cabinet Member, who brief the wider 
SMT and Cabinet, as well as regular updates to Environment Scrutiny Committe.  
We will move to reporting emissions every six months (September/March). This 
will include reviewing any assumptions utilised; developing future actions and 
pressing for additional Government funding to support us to achieve our goals.  This will help us to:
 Identify whether this plan needs to be amended if our actions are not 
strong enough to fully tackle the problem
 Forecast an emissions timetable to follow and to check whether we are 
on target to hit our 2030 deadline
Borough-wide
This Action Plan does not set out how the Borough as a whole will reach 
carbon neutrality. Although it does identify ways that the Council can use 
its powers to support the transition to a low carbon future, such as through 
land use planning and the provision of infrastructure. The Council has 
set out an aspiration, working with partners, residents and businesses to 
achieve the goal of Borough neutrality by 2030. 
To address the Climate Emergency, the Council established the Telford and 
Wrekin Borough Climate Change Partnership to work collaboratively with 
Town and Parish Councils, the private sector, educational establishments 
and others to draw upon our Borough partners’ knowledge and expertise to 
further the Climate Change agenda Borough-wide.
Trees4TW - idverde UK 
crews delivering 8,600 
saplings to residents, 
schools, community 
organisations and 
groups.Action Plan Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral10Becoming carbon neutral Action Plan 2021/22
This action plan describes the actions the Council will take to reduce carbon emissions in line with our commitment to achieve carbon neutrality by 2030.
Ref Action Completion year Estimated annual carbon 
savings (tCO 2e)Status Update/Source of New Action
Council buildings
1 Implement a programme 
of retrofit schemes across 
Council owned buildings, 
maximising funding via the 
Marches Local Enterprise 
Partnership low carbon 
tech support programmes 
such as the Sustainable 
Energy in Public Buildings 
(SEPUBU)SEPUBU 
Funding to end
December 2023 It is estimated that this 
will achieve reductions 
in annual primary energy 
use of 2.06 GWh and 
annual greenhouse gas 
emissions savings of 
660 tonnes CO2e.In progress To date, eight Council retrofit projects have been 
completed, saving 268 tonnes CO2e. Funding approval 
has been gained for Oakengates Theatre from SEPUBU 
and works have started on site for solar electricity panels, 
also known as photovoltaics (PV) (they capture the sun’s 
energy and convert it into electricity). The PV is of size: 
37.4KW, which will produce: 33,540 kWh PA and avoid 
emissions of 17,775kg pa. Funding is being sought for a 
pipeline of new projects, which include:
 PV at Oakengates Leisure Centre
 LED lighting and solar car port on the roof of 
Southwater One 
 LED lighting and solar PV on buildings or solar on 
the golf range
 Solar PV and LED lighting at Abraham Darby 
Leisure Centre
 LED lighting and solar PV at the Arthog Outdoor 
Education Facility
 LED lighting and solar PV on buildings or Solar 
Carport at Madeley Ski Centre
 Solar PV and LED lighting at Southwater Visitor Centre.Action Plan Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral11Ref Action Completion year Estimated annual carbon 
savings (tCO 2e)Status Update/Source of New Action
2 Implement new power 
settings and usage 
controls on laptops, 
monitors and printers to 
reduce energy usage when 
not in useDecember 2022 75 tonnes CO 2e In progress Opened discussions with suppliers. Awaiting supplier 
information on best settings to implement and any 
pre-requisites or other variables to consider. 
3 Identify and deliver a 
programme of energy 
efficiency improvements 
in Council buildings and 
school buildings including 
analysis of energy usage 
with WME.
As well as ensure any roof-
top maintenance works 
to council buildings and 
schools consider installation 
of solar PV to help reduce 
costs of installation.April 2025 Target to reduce energy 
costs by £20-£25K pa 
equating to 200,000 kWh 
or 52 tonnes of CO 2e.In progress As part of extension and refurbishment of school 
buildings the Council will meet or better building 
regulations via the use of energy management, LED 
Lighting, Solar PV, improved thermal values and air 
admittance. For example: the Council are building 
an extension at Langley School. This has improved 
U values (reduced heat loss) and the Council has 
installed LED lighting. 
Quarterly meetings are held with WME to scrutinise 
data and where possible identify energy efficiencies.
Action Plan Ref key (n) = new actionAction Plan Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral12Ref Action Completion year Estimated annual carbon 
savings (tCO 2e)Status Update/Source of New Action
4 Roll-out of Windows 10
devices to staff and 
Members.April 2021 A typical desktop 
computer uses 868kW of 
electricity per year. The 
Council has replaced 
computers with laptops 
which use 80% less 
electricity than a desktop 
computers. 2,400 
desktop computers 
have been replaced by 
laptops. Saving 200 
tonnes CO2e emissions.Complete Roll-out complete.
5 Relocating the ICT server 
room and installing 
natural coolingApril 2021 New datacentre will use 
natural cooling, each unit 
will save over 60 tonnes 
of CO2e when compared 
to conventional air 
conditioning.In progress Installation will be carried out 15/02/21, with 
completion on 12/03/21.
6 Review opening 
arrangements for main 
Council administrative 
buildings over Christmas 
while maintaining all 
essential servicesApril 2021 Shutting the 
Darby House and 
Addenbrooke House 
for Christmas saves 6.4 
tonnes CO2e Complete Over the Christmas period in 2020, all office buildings 
were closed. Action Plan Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral13Ref Action Completion year Estimated annual carbon 
savings (tCO 2e)Status Update/Source of New Action
7 Define and implement an 
optimum flexible working 
pattern to reduce the 
carbon impact of staff 
travel and enable reduction 
in required office space 
as well as updating key 
employment policies such 
as flexible working to 
minimise the carbon impact 
of employees at workApril 2022 To be determined 
following completion of 
accommodation review. 
Closing one core office 
will save 67 tonnes CO2e
The 2019/20 footprint 
was only slightly affected 
by Covid-19 restrictions, 
as the Council’s 
accounting year runs 
from 1st April 2019 to 
31st March 2020. The 
Covid-19 restrictions 
started in mid-March 
2020, and this was when 
the majority of staff 
started working from 
home. The effects of 
Covid-19 restrictions will 
be included when we 
report on the accounting 
year 2020/21.In progress As a result of the Covid-19 pandemic, the majority 
of office-based staff have worked from home for 
significant periods during 2020/1. The carbon savings 
made will be significant and we will update our 
monitoring at the end of this financial year in March 
2021 to assess the full year impact on our emissions. 
The pandemic has highlighted the benefits of staff 
working from home and has presented an opportunity 
for the Council to explore a blended way of working 
with staff working a portion of their time at the office 
and at home. Since the Council are looking at blended 
ways of working the Council will explore on how 
best to account for energy being used at homes by 
employees while undertaking Council work.  
An accommodation survey has gone out to employees 
to establish what the office requirements will be in the 
long term.   
Agile working/working at home policies are currently 
being developed to define working arrangements/
expectations post Covid-19.  
Action Plan Ref key (n) = new actionAction Plan Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral14Ref Action Completion year Estimated annual carbon 
savings (tCO 2e)Status Update/Source of New Action
8
(n)Explore the possibility of 
having the Ecosia internet 
search engine, on desktops 
alongside the default 
search engine as a visible 
icon.December 2022 Ecosia use profits from 
every search to plant 
trees.New action Source of action: Member drop-in session.
9 
(n)Install Ground Source or 
Air Source heat pump 
technology and improve 
the thermal efficiency of 
council owned buildingsDecember 2022 Circa 800 tonnes CO2e 
savings.In progress Source of action: Employee suggestion.
The Council has been successful in securing Low 
Carbon Skills funding which enabled us to assess 
the feasibility of installing heat pumps and thermal 
insulation technologies in seven Council buildings.  
This resulted in four bids being submitted to the Public 
Sector Decarbonisation Scheme in January 2021, of 
which two schemes (Oakengates and Newport Leisure 
Centres) have been awarded grant funding of £1.37m. 
In parallel with delivering these projects, we will review 
whether the schemes that were not awarded grant 
funding can be taken forward as invest to save projects. Action Plan Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral15Ref Action Completion year Estimated annual carbon 
savings (tCO 2e)Status Update/Source of New Action
Borough buildings
10 Explore opportunities to 
improve the energy efficiency 
of the Council’s Property 
Investment Portfolio (PIP)December 2025 The PIP is excluded from 
the Council’s baseline as 
we are not in control of 
energy use by tenants/
residents, however the 
carbon savings brought 
about by the action will 
count towards reducing 
the Borough’s carbon 
impact.In progress The Council are currently exploring opportunities 
at Southwater Car Park to install LED Lighting and 
a solar car port on the roof. A Salix loan has been 
submitted. Another Salix loan application is being 
worked upon for 67 New Street Wellington (retail/
office accommodation) for replacement lighting and 
replacement of the gas heating system.
Action Plan Ref key (n) = new actionAction Plan Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral16Ref Action Completion year Estimated annual carbon 
savings (tCO 2e)Status Update/Source of New Action
11 Explore opportunities 
to deliver carbon 
reduction/efficiency 
in the development 
and operation for new 
property investments 
including Ni ParkDecember 2022 The carbon savings 
brought about by the 
action will count towards 
reducing the Borough’s 
carbon impact.In progress Tender for Ni-Park Phase 1 includes electric charging 
points for vehicles and PVs on units.  Contract 
awarded December 2020 with completion of 
development in Q3 21/22.
12 
(n)Develop a business case 
for large-scale investment 
in schools and community 
rooftop mounted solar 
PV to include a review 
of options around how 
best to pass on the 
energy generated (Power 
Purchase Agreement, 
Sleeving, Private Wire etc).December 2022 The carbon savings 
brought about by the 
action will count towards 
reducing the Borough’s 
carbon impact.New action Source of action – Resident’s survey, Telford and 
Wrekin Borough Climate Change Partnership, best 
practice research.Action Plan Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral17Ref Action Completion year Estimated annual carbon 
savings (tCO 2e)Status Update/Source of New Action
Council transport
13 Develop and implement 
a Corporate Travel Plan 
minimising car travel for 
commuting and between 
officesApril 2022 Circa 133 tonnes CO2e In progress As a result of the Covid-19 pandemic, the majority of 
office-based staff have worked from home for significant 
periods during 2020/1, which has led to significant 
reductions in business mileage. For example, in April 
2019, staff claimed 151,448 miles (43.1657 tCO2e) of 
business mileage, however in lockdown in April 2020, 
this reduced to 76,203 miles (21.7194 tCO2e)– which is 
nearly half. A commitment has been made to sustain a 
30% reduction in business mileage on an ongoing basis 
from April 2021.  The Council has commissioned work to 
implement a new Corporate Travel Plan in 2021 that will 
set out the approach to delivering this target.
14 Implement a Cycle to Work 
scheme for employees.April 2021 On the basis of a 250 
employee take up, the 
carbon saving would 
equate to 55 tonnes CO2e.Complete Back to Bikes initiative launched on 11th November 
2020 and includes a Cycle 2 Work scheme from 
Halfords (which includes some independent bike 
stores) as well as various discounts and offers from 
local independent cycle stores across the Borough. 
Regular management information will be available 
monthly in order to monitor take up against the target. 
A virtual roadshow will be held in 2021 to encourage 
employee take up. 15 members of staff have joined 
the scheme as of December 2020 which equates to 
16.5 tonnes CO2e of savings.
Action Plan Ref key (n) = new actionAction Plan Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral18Ref Action Completion year Estimated annual carbon 
savings (tCO 2e)Status Update/Source of New Action
15 Explore options for 
schemes to encourage 
employees to make greater 
use of public transport, 
such as travel loans for rail 
and bus passes December 2022 Supports savings linked 
to Action 12 - circa 133 
tonnes CO2e based 
upon the target to 
reduce business mileage 
on an ongoing basis 
from April 2021In progress Employee discount in place for Arriva bus travel across 
the Borough. Nine Telford & Wrekin Council employees 
are taking advantage of the travel club scheme and 
this will be promoted more widely to increase take-
up. Currently, the Council are exploring options for 
train travel discounts for staff. Other schemes also 
being explored are employee discounts on electric car 
charging points. 
16 Explore the replacement of 
pool vehicles with ultra-low 
emission vehiclesDecember 2030 There are 31 pool 
vehicles averaging 
approx. 268,000
miles a year, equating 
to approx. 72 tonnes 
CO2 per annum. If these 
were to be replaced 
with ultra-low emission 
vehicles, there is the 
potential on average to 
save 52 tonnes CO2e 
dependent on the 
vehicle type.In progress The first six EV vans have been delivered and have 
been operational since November 2020, saving 6 
tonnes of CO2 per annum. The Council will procure 
a further three EV vans for the Enforcement Team in 
2021. A report on the rest of the Council’s fleet has 
been undertaken by the Energy Saving Trust and will 
be reviewed in 2021.Action Plan Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral19Ref Action Completion year Estimated annual carbon 
savings (tCO 2e)Status Update/Source of New Action
17 Procurement of a multi 
partner electric vehicle 
framework and deployment 
across car parks in Telford 
and Wrekin – not limited to 
Telford & Wrekin Council 
ownershipApril 2022 Supports the wider 
Borough switch to low 
emission vehicles. In progress To go out to procurement in Q1 2021.
18 Review Council’s Fleet 
Services to ensure 
optimum efficiency and 
carbon reductionsApril 2022 To be determined, once 
data is available.In progress Transport review process has commenced with 
implementation of measures in 2021.
19 Run a campaign to promote 
electric vehicles via the 
Zenith Salary Sacrifice Car 
Lease SchemeApril 2022 To be determined – 
target for future uptake 
of EVs via Lease 
Scheme to be agreed.Ongoing A promotion campaign took place in September 2020 
highlighting offers available on electric vehicles and 
providing information on EVs. The Council are liaising 
with Zenith on a communications plan to promote EVs 
each month. Currently 10% of employees who have a 
Zenith vehicle have an EV vehicle. Another roadshow 
is scheduled in July 2021.
Action Plan Ref key (n) = new actionAction Plan Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral20Ref Action Completion year Estimated annual carbon 
savings (tCO 2e)Status Update/Source of New Action
20 
(n)Install charging points for 
electric vehicles at Darby 
HouseDecember 2022 This may potentially 
increase electricity usage 
on Telford & Wrekin 
Council owned carparks, 
however greater use of 
EVs would contribute 
towards reducing the 
Borough’s carbon impact.New action Source of action: Resident’s survey, Environment 
Scrutiny Committee
Borough transport
21 Improvements to bus and 
rail servicesDecember 2025 The carbon savings 
brought about by the 
action will count towards 
reducing the Borough’s 
carbon impact.In progress Rail - Midlands Connect, electrification study ongoing. 
The Council are also working with Howarth on rail 
provision in Ironbridge.
Bus Services and active travel - various studies and 
projects are being progressed.
22 Improvements to cycling 
and walking routes as 
well as a review of the 
Local Transport Plan to 
include a new Walking 
and Cycling StrategyDecember 2025 The carbon savings 
brought about by the 
action will count towards 
reducing the Borough’s 
carbon impact.In progress The Council has launched a £2.6m Travel Telford 
Sustainable Transport fund, which has funded:
 A new cycle parking scheme to provide an extra 
300 cycle stands (600 spaces) across the borough. 
 A wide ranging inspection and maintenance review 
of the borough cycling and walking routes, starting 
with our cycling network, to identify any immediate 
and longer term improvements neededAction Plan Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral21Ref Action Completion year Estimated annual carbon 
savings (tCO 2e)Status Update/Source of New Action
In the longer term, there will be improved publicity and 
mapping of the network as well as connecting more 
walking and cycling paths to make an even better network.
The Council will also trial new facilities which could 
include cycle lanes and bike parking in areas such as 
the Wrekin, and also bring forward improvements for 
pedestrian and cyclists outside schools.
On 13 November 2020 the government announced 
Tranche 2 of the Active Travel Fund which is aimed at 
cycling or walking schemes that are permanent and 
not experiment or pilot schemes subject to public 
consultation after implementation. Telford & Wrekin 
Council received a funding allocation of £229,500 
for the following scheme: The A518 Connectivity 
Package, which will improve the connectivity of the 
National Cycle Route 55 through the installation of a 
permanent footway/cycleway adjacent to the A518.
23 Explore the provision of 
a 100% renewable fast 
charging Electric Vehicle 
ForecourtDecember 2025 The carbon savings 
brought about by the 
action will count towards 
reducing the Borough’s 
carbon impact.In progress The Council is working with different providers to 
identify a viable site. 
Action Plan Ref key (n) = new actionAction Plan Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral22Ref Action Completion year Estimated annual carbon 
savings (tCO 2e)Status Update/Source of New Action
24 Explore initiating a public 
e-bike hire scheme for 
the Borough: subject to 
market interest implement 
a cycle hire scheme with a 
company, on a trial basis December 2022 The carbon savings 
brought about by the 
action will count towards 
reducing the Borough’s 
carbon impact.In progress A feasibility study commenced in January 2021 with 
completion in April 2021 from which this initiative will 
be explored further.
25 
(n)Explore greener taxi licensing 
- encourage taxi drivers to 
licence electric vehicles December 2025 The carbon savings 
brought about by the 
action will count towards 
reducing the Borough’s 
carbon impact.New action Source of action – best practice research and 
resident’s survey and member drop-in session.
Borough housing
26 Aim to reduce the carbon 
footprint of Station Quarter 
(the vacant land between 
the railway station and the 
shopping centre) December 2024 The carbon savings 
brought about by the 
action will count towards 
reducing the Borough’s 
carbon impact.In progress Hybrid planning application being prepared covering 
information on project enabling works, public realm 
and first development phase with outline detail on the 
development zones. Carbon reduction opportunities will 
be scoped as part of this exercise. Target submission 
date for planning application Q2 21/22.  Target date for 
delivery of first residential phase Q4 23/24.Action Plan Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral23Ref Action Completion year Estimated annual carbon 
savings (tCO 2e)Status Update/Source of New Action
27 Explore carbon reduction 
proposals for future NuPlace 
developments (housing 
company wholly owned 
by Nuplace), focussing 
initially on the next phase 
of the existing programme 
equating to 60 homes.April 2025 The carbon savings 
brought about by the 
action will count towards 
reducing the Borough’s 
carbon impact.In progress Southwater Way:
Planning application approved for 46 homes off 
Southwater Way - all properties to include PVs and 
EV charging points - works started on site in Nov/Dec 
2020. Completion Spring 2020.
Granville, Donnington: 
Energy Consultant appointed to develop proposals 
for low carbon development for a 325 unit scheme. 
The range of carbon reduction technologies being 
considered on the scheme include fabric upgrades, 
water heat recovery, electric car charging points, solar 
panels, alongside water diverters on larger properties. 
Start on site July 2021. Site completion: March 2025.                                             
10 to 15 Nuplace properties are to be built to the 
Future Homes standard and will be electrically heated 
with PV/battery storage.                                          
Action Plan Ref key (n) = new actionAction Plan Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral24Ref Action Completion year Estimated annual carbon 
savings (tCO 2e)Status Update/Source of New Action
28 Promotion of energy 
efficiency activities 
addressing fuel poverty for 
eligible residentsDecember 2021 The carbon savings 
brought about by the 
action will count towards 
reducing the Borough’s 
carbon impact.In progress LAD2 - Central Government’s Local Authority Delivery 
programme – Telford & Wrekin Council have been 
allocated, by the Midlands Energy Hub, £520,000 capital 
funding to improve heating and/or insulation of some of 
the least energy efficient housing stock in the borough.  In 
line with our climate change aspirations, fossil fuel heating 
cannot be included in this programme - delivery by 
December 2021.
Telford & Wrekin Council’s Statement Of Intent was 
published on 17th December 2020. The SOI is a public 
statement of the criteria set by the Council to identify 
households eligible for energy efficiency measures.
Telford Energy Advice Centre (TEA) –from June 2020, has 
received 150 enquiries to date, with all clients receiving 
help and advice. 66 referrals being made to our ECO 
partner, AgilityECO. The service has been promoted 
through podcasts, press releases and staff refresh 
training – with a new communications plan currently being 
designed to raise awareness of the service, making it 
easier for residents to access grant funding and advice.Action Plan Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral25Ref Action Completion year Estimated annual carbon 
savings (tCO 2e)Status Update/Source of New Action
29 
(n)Enable a group buying 
scheme for domestic 
solar PV and battery 
storage eg Solar Together 
or a local alternativeDecember 2023 The carbon savings 
brought about by the 
action will count towards 
reducing the Borough’s 
carbon impact.New action Source of idea: Resident’s Survey, best practice 
research, Environment Scrutiny Committee.
30 
(n)Explore employee 
discount or salary 
sacrifice schemes for 
solar/battery installationsDecember 2022 Circa 102 CO2e savings 
based upon the Energy 
Saving Trust who state 
that a typical home solar 
PV system could save 
around 1.3 to 1.6 tonnes 
of carbon per year, 
depending on where in 
the UK you live. Based 
upon 1 in 20 employees 
taking up the initiative.New action Source of action: Employee suggestion, best practice 
research, Environment Scrutiny Committee.
Action Plan Ref key (n) = new actionAction Plan Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral26Ref Action Completion year Estimated annual carbon 
savings (tCO 2e)Status Update/Source of New Action
31 
(n)Whole house retrofit 
programme - stock owned 
by Telford & Wrekin 
Council eg temporary 
accommodation/supported 
accommodation or loans 
to private landlords. EPC 
below C to be taken up to 
C and above.   Pilot retrofit 
programme to improve 
insulation standards and 
reduce fossil fuel heating  - 
in line with carbon neutral 
target of 2030 
 Apply for Local 
Authority Delivery 
funding (LAD) 
 Explore options to 
use Energy Company 
Obligation (ECO) funding
 Be actively involved 
with WMCA/SHAP 
Warm Homes save lives April 2025 The carbon savings 
brought about by the 
action will count towards 
reducing the Borough’s 
carbon impact.New action Source of action: Employee suggestion, best 
practice researchAction Plan Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral27Ref Action Completion year Estimated annual carbon 
savings (tCO 2e)Status Update/Source of New Action
Council street lighting
32 Build on the conversion 
to date of over 20,000 
traditional street lighting 
to LED lighting and to 
convert the remainder of 
the highway and footway 
street lighting assets:
1 Conversion of seven 
high mast lights on 
roundabouts
2 Conversion of 423 
adopted non LED lights 
which exceed the original 
contract projections
3 Conversion of 263 
newly/to be adopted 
non LED lights
4 Conversion of floodlights 
at Council managed 
public car parksDecember 2022 Since the contract started 
in April 17, the Council 
has saved 7,414 tonnes 
of CO2 compared to the 
16/17 year benchmark.In progress The conversion of traditional street lights to LED 
currently is 98.98%. Majority of remaining lights to 
be converted are wall lights and lights mounted on 
wooden poles. 
1 High mast conversions - works have started on 
three of the sites but work has been delayed 
over Summer 2020 due to Covid-19 and other 
working constraints. 
2. Converted 423 non LED lights over and above original 
contract projections – these have been completed.
3 144 out of 263 lights have been converted on 
newly adopted non LED lights.
4 Work on conversion of council owned carpark 
floodlights has commenced with a pilot at 
Oakengates Leisure Centre.
Action Plan Ref key (n) = new actionAction Plan Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral28Ref Action Completion year Estimated annual carbon 
savings (tCO 2e)Status Update/Source of New Action
33 Opportunities to be 
identified to replace non-
LED lighting at the Town 
Park and Council owned 
car parks and at Council 
managed buildingsDecember 2022 Approximately 5 tonnes 
CO2e but this will be 
revised as more data
becomes available.In progress External LED lighting will be installed as part of repair 
and refurbishment within the Town Park.
Borough finance/grants
34 
(n)Investigate options for 
residents and community 
groups to invest directly in 
climate change schemes 
in the Borough, such as 
community investment 
bonds via a crowdfunding 
platform provider.  This is 
subject to carrying out full 
due diligence regarding 
the financial and legal 
aspects of such a scheme, 
including ensuring that 
the rate offered would 
not result in the Council 
subsiding private lendersApril 2025 To be determined, once 
data is available.New action Source of action: Shropshire Climate Action Partnership, 
employee suggestion, best practice researchAction Plan Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral29Ref Action Completion year Estimated annual carbon 
savings (tCO 2e)Status Update/Source of New Action
Council finance/grants
35 
(n)Community carbon 
reduction grant - small 
grant (up to £5k) for 
organisations to implement 
carbon reduction measures 
- £100k funding agreedApril 2021 The carbon savings 
brought about by the 
action will count towards 
reducing the Borough’s 
carbon impact.In progress Source of action: Telford and Wrekin Borough Climate 
Change Partnership, Town and Parish Councils, best 
practice research, Resident’s Survey.
The grant scheme was launched on 19th February 2021.
Council energy
36 Switch to a green 
electricity tariffApril 2021 Since the baseline year 
of 2018/19, Telford & 
Wrekin Council’s carbon 
emissions have reduced 
by approx. 2,902.72 
tonnes CO2e (36%) from 
7,957.72 tonnes CO2e 
to 5,055 tonnes CO2e in 
2019/20. The decrease 
has been achieved by 
implementing a range 
of carbon reduction 
measures, such as 
moving to a new green 
electricity tariff. Complete The Council has procured an enhanced electricity tariff 
which ensures that all Renewable Energy Guarantees 
Origin (REGO’s) are sourced from a generator or 
technology directly contracted with Total Gas and 
Power. This ensures that 100% of the REGO’s are 
purchased along with the associated generation. The 
sources remain solely wind, solar, and hydro. This will 
be available from April 2021.
Action Plan Ref key (n) = new actionAction Plan Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral30Ref Action Completion year Estimated annual carbon 
savings (tCO 2e)Status Update/Source of New Action
37 Carry out a heat 
mapping and energy 
master planning study to 
determine the potential to 
expand and decarbonise 
the existing Energy Centre 
in Southwater, which 
currently provides heat and 
power to Telford Ice Rink 
and Southwater OneDecember 2022 The savings are approx. 
73 tonnes CO2e - based 
on data from the original 
modelling of Southwater 
Heat Network Report. 
From further research, 
this could be significantly 
higher. Some of the 
additional savings could 
contribute towards the 
Borough footprint.In progress The Invitation to Tender (ITT) has been issued. The 
Council are hoping to award the tender mid-April, with 
a study completion date of June 2021.  
38 Explore and identify further 
opportunities for renewable 
power generation on 
Telford & Wrekin Council 
owned land.                                                April 2022 Subject to the outcome 
of the review of 
opportunities and sites.In progress A review of Council-owned sites which are within 
1-2km of sub stations with potential capacity has been 
carried out. The Council has asked Western Power 
Distribution for grid connection budget estimates for a 
number of potential Council-owned sites.Action Plan Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral31Ref Action Completion year Estimated annual carbon 
savings (tCO 2e)Status Update/Source of New Action
39 
(n)Explore the purchase 
of local bio-methane 
certificates (within the 
LEP /West Midlands 
region) to offset natural 
gas consumption in the 
short term, while actively 
reducing gas consumption 
in total.December 2022 A significant part of 
the Council’s energy 
consumption relates to 
gas use. The purchase 
of bio-methane 
certificates will reduce 
carbon emissions from 
gas use to net zero.New action Source of action: Employee suggestion, best 
practice research
40 
(n)Explore the potential for a 
renewable energy scheme 
to generate energy 
from abandoned mine 
workings – a mine water 
district network could see 
geothermal energy drawn 
from flooded mines to 
heat some developments 
in the Borough.December 2025 The carbon savings 
brought about by the 
action will count towards 
reducing the Borough’s 
carbon impact.New action Source of action: Employee suggestion
Action Plan Ref key (n) = new actionAction Plan Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral32Ref Action Completion year Estimated annual carbon 
savings (tCO 2e)Status Update/Source of New Action
Communications and engagement
41 Launch Sustainable 
Telford & Wrekin Website 
to provide a point of 
contact and information 
for the communityApril 2021 The carbon savings 
brought about by the 
action will count towards 
reducing the Borough’s 
carbon impact.Complete See http://sustainabletelfordandwrekin.co.uk/
42 
(n)Include environmental 
volunteering in new My 
Telford App to incentivise 
local environmental actionApril 2022 The carbon savings 
brought about by the 
action will count towards 
reducing the Borough’s 
carbon impact.New action Source of action: Environment Scrutiny Committee
43 
(n)Organise a Green Festival 
- showcasing  food, stalls, 
speakers, activities and 
crafts etc. to raise awareness 
of climate changeDecember 2022 The carbon savings 
brought about by the 
action will count towards 
reducing the Borough’s 
carbon impact.Autumn 2021 
*dependent 
upon 
Covid-19 
restrictionsSource of action: Plastic Free Taskforce, within the 
Plastic Free Action Plan there is an action for all 
Council run events to be sustainable as possible.
44 Work with Parish and Town 
Councils to support and 
encourage the take up of 
actions to deliver carbon 
neutralityOngoing The carbon savings 
brought about by the 
action will count towards 
reducing the Borough’s 
carbon impact.Complete The Council has developed a Climate Emergency 
Toolkit for Town and Parish Councils and have 
established a Town and Parish Climate Change sub-
group (currently there are 16 Town and Parishes that 
are members) to feed into the Telford and Wrekin 
Climate Change Partnership via SALC (Shropshire 
Association of Local Councils) and the Parish Forum.Action Plan Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral33Ref Action Completion year Estimated annual carbon 
savings (tCO 2e)Status Update/Source of New Action
45 Form a Borough Climate 
Change Partnership to work 
together with the Council 
and engage the wider 
community to develop and 
deliver a Borough-Wide 
Climate Neutrality Action 
Plan. The Council will:
 Establish the initial 
Partnership including 
public/private/
voluntary organisations 
representing key sectors 
and partners active 
in the Borough, and 
facilitate the sharing of 
practice and learning 
to strengthen individual 
organisation action plans
 Support the Partnership 
in establishing a 
baseline carbon positionDecember 2021 The carbon savings 
brought about by the 
action will count towards 
reducing the Borough’s 
carbon impact.In progress The Partnership has been formed, the first meeting 
was on the 24 June 2020.   The Partnership is 
currently working through sub-groups to develop a 
Borough Action Plan for consultation with Borough 
residents in April 2021.           
Action Plan Ref key (n) = new actionAction Plan Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral34Ref Action Completion year Estimated annual carbon 
savings (tCO 2e)Status Update/Source of New Action
 Work as a partner to 
develop proposals on 
how the Borough should 
address becoming 
carbon neutral;
 Work as a partner 
to engage with 
and consult on the 
proposals with the 
wider community;
 As a partner support 
the development and 
delivery of a Climate 
Action Plan for the 
Borough.Action Plan Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral35Ref Action Completion year Estimated annual carbon 
savings (tCO 2e)Status Update/Source of New Action
46 Develop and deliver an 
engagement programme 
for schools, community 
groups, interest groups and 
residents to promote climate 
change and gauge ways to 
support/get involved with 
the Borough Partnership: 
 Provision of web 
based information 
on opportunities for 
achieving energy 
reductions and 
carbon savings, with 
signposts to further 
sources of information.
 Web based information 
on campaigns and/
or initiatives to raise 
awareness and support 
on carbon reduction.Ongoing The carbon savings 
brought about by the 
action will count towards 
reducing the Borough’s 
carbon impact.In progress Website: complete see action 49.
Campaigns: plastic-free; food waste recycling; World 
Environment Day; Cooperatives for Climate Action, 
Trees4TW. 
Toolkit: completed and shared with Town and 
Parish Council Sub-group. Provision of web based 
information on opportunities for achieving energy 
reductions and carbon savings, with signposts to 
further sources of information. 
Creation of the Climate Change Champions volunteer 
role (there are currently 16 volunteers). The core 
function of the role is to promote Climate Change and 
Sustainability, by encouraging effective resource use 
and leading by example to help Borough residents do 
the same through;
 sharing information with members of their 
community on how they can get involved;
 promoting local/national Climate Change and 
Sustainability campaigns;
Action Plan Ref key (n) = new actionAction Plan Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral36Ref Action Completion year Estimated annual carbon 
savings (tCO 2e)Status Update/Source of New Action
 A targeted advice 
service and active 
approach to carbon 
reduction with schools.
 A toolkit and support 
programme for working 
with Parish and Town 
Councils helping the Council to promote Council Climate 
Change and Sustainability consultations to their 
communities.
47 Updated promotion of 
Switch Telford – white label 
energy comparison and 
switching site.April 2021 The carbon savings 
brought about by the 
action will count towards 
reducing the Borough’s 
carbon impact.Complete Up to the end of November 2020, there have now 
been just over 2035 switches.
Council campaigns have included raising awareness of 
the green tariffs that are available on Switch Telford.
48 
(n)Introduce Pavegen system 
in Southwater. This system 
uses the power of walking 
to ‘charge’ smart benches 
and/or electronic signs. 
An interactive section of 
this paving would link 
into our climate change 
commitments to provide an 
education and engagement 
piece of street infrastructure.December 2021 The carbon savings 
brought about by the 
action will count towards 
reducing the Borough’s 
carbon impact.New action Source of action: Employee suggestionAction Plan Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral37Ref Action Completion year Estimated annual carbon 
savings (tCO 2e)Status Update/Source of New Action
49 
(n)Implement a Low Carbon 
Advertising PolicyDecember 2021 The carbon savings 
brought about by the 
action will count towards 
reducing the Borough’s 
carbon impact.New action Source of action: Resident suggestion
50 
(n)Hold an annual youth 
climate summit – as 
part of this promote and 
increase take-up of 
Eco-Schools programmeDecember 2022 The carbon savings 
brought about by the 
action will count towards 
reducing the Borough’s 
carbon impact.New action 
*dependent 
upon 
Covid-19 
restrictionsSource of action: Best practice research, 
Resident’s survey
51 
(n)Training and skills 
provision for industrial 
decarbonisation - 
carbon literacy training, 
engagement with 
providers, specific 
apprenticeship schemesApril 2023 The carbon savings 
brought about by the 
action will count towards 
reducing the Borough’s 
carbon impact.New action Source of action: Resident’s survey, best practice research
Action Plan Ref key (n) = new actionAction Plan Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral38Ref Action Completion year Estimated annual carbon 
savings (tCO 2e)Status Update/Source of New Action
Council planning policy
52 Identify where natural flood 
management approaches 
and Sustainable Drainage 
Systems (SuDS) can be 
used to increase carbon 
sequestration.                                                    April 2025 Once known, the 
carbon sequestration 
figure will be applied 
to the Council’s 
sequestration measure.In progress The Council are working as part of the River Severn 
Partnership to identify opportunities to address 
flood risk in the borough. Part of that work will be to 
maximise opportunities to address flood risk through 
the use of ‘natural flood management’ which will help 
utilise natural assets to slow the flow of water courses 
especially during and after periods of high rainfall. This 
work is at an early stage and the Council will continue 
to work with partners to maximise opportunities to 
incorporate natural flood management into projects 
that come forward. 
As part of the Local Plan Review the Council are 
reviewing and updating planning policy.Action Plan Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral39Ref Action Completion year Estimated annual carbon 
savings (tCO 2e)Status Update/Source of New Action
Borough planning policy
53 Use the review of the 
Local Plan to develop 
robust policy that supports 
and promotes a move to 
carbon neutrality, including 
through consideration of 
how development will need 
to adapt to the impacts 
of climate change and 
promotes opportunities 
to maximise carbon 
sequestration.April 2025 The carbon savings 
brought about by the 
action will count towards 
reducing the Borough’s 
carbon impact.In progress The Issues and Options consultation has concluded, 
next stage of consultation is on the preferred options 
stage in Summer 2021.
54 Use the Local Plan review 
Call for sites to identify 
sites for renewable and low 
carbon energy generationApril 2021 The carbon savings 
brought about by the 
action will count towards 
reducing the Borough’s 
carbon impact.Complete Call for Sites has now concluded, any submissions for 
renewable energy sites will be considered as part of 
the site selection process.
Action Plan Ref key (n) = new actionAction Plan Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral40Ref Action Completion year Estimated annual carbon 
savings (tCO 2e)Status Update/Source of New Action
Council corporate
55 Ensure all Service Plans 
and Business Plans 
produced from 2020 
consider measures to 
contribute to delivering the 
Council’s commitment to 
carbon neutralityApril 2021 This has and will 
continue to identify 
further actions to 
include in the update of 
the Action PlanComplete Climate change is part of the Council’s revised priorities, 
published in October 2020.  All service strategies for 
Directors are now finalised and link the long-term aims 
of each Directorate to this priority. Where appropriate, 
climate change actions that will deliver these aims have 
been detailed in business plans. Business Plans will be 
reviewed and updated on an ongoing basis to ensure 
they remain accurate and relevant.  
56 Promotion of existing 
Council schemes of:
Flexible Working Policy;                                       
Agile Working Guidance;                                        
Telford & Wrekin 
Discount Travel Club,                      
Cycle to Work SchemeApril 2021 Link to Actions 7 and 12 Complete A four weekly internal comms plan has been developed 
to promote/advertise Council schemes and policies.
57 Commit to become a 
Carbon Literate CouncilApril 2021 Raising awareness on 
climate change and 
carbon reduction
measures reduces 
energy usage by staff of 
between 10-15%.In progress Course identified, to be completed by mid-March 2021Action Plan Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral41Ref Action Completion year Estimated annual carbon 
savings (tCO 2e)Status Update/Source of New Action
58 All Telford & Wrekin 
Council strategies and 
reports to explicitly set out 
the environmental impacts 
from any recommended 
decision and contribution 
to carbon neutrality.April 2022 Will depend on the 
strategy, project
or decision.In progress The format has been drafted and will be in place by 
Summer 2021.
59 Require our major 
environment and cleansing 
contractors – Balfour Beatty; 
Idverde and Veolia to 
produce ambitious Carbon 
Reduction Action Plans 
covering their operations 
within the Borough                  April 2021 Since the start of 
the Veolia contract 
(2014), there has been 
a reduction of circa 
23,000 tonnes of CO2e.  
From 1st April 2019 
to 31st March 2020 
Idverde net greenhouse 
gas emissions achieved, 
753 tonnes CO2e Complete Balfour Beatty:  has already developed and 
implemented a Sustainability Plan. However, Balfour 
Beatty will be developing a new Sustainability Plan 
that will work on supporting the Councils ambitious 
to be carbon neutral by 2030. Idverde: carbon action 
plan for Idverde has been developed. Idverde are 
also looking to secure additional EV’s on their fleet 
(potentially 6 in total from April 2021) Veolia: have 
produced a carbon action plan. Since the start of the 
Veolia contract (2014), there has been a reduction of 
circa 23,000 tonnes of CO2e.  
Action Plan Ref key (n) = new actionAction Plan Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral42Ref Action Completion year Estimated annual carbon 
savings (tCO 2e)Status Update/Source of New Action
60 Where appropriate the 
Council will increase the 
environmental evaluation 
criteria weightings to 
encourage suppliers to use 
sustainable practices and 
to reduce carbon emissions 
in the supply chain.April 2021 Many procurement 
decisions have the 
potential to reduce 
carbon emissions. 
However, this will depend 
on the product or service 
being procured.Complete Procurement guidance written for environmental 
questions and scoring.  To ensure this is captured in 
procurement exercises, Officers are prompted in the 
Procurement Intentions, the Procurement Plan, the 
Template documents and the Contracts Register.Action Plan Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral43Ref Action Completion year Estimated annual carbon 
savings (tCO 2e)Status Update/Source of New Action
61 
(n)Re-surfacing roads - in 
some areas a ‘warm-mix’ 
of materials is used for 
resurfacing, instead of a 
traditional ‘hot-mix’, which 
cuts fuel consumption 
and the production of 
greenhouse gases. Another 
technique is carriageway 
recycling, which sees the 
old carriageway material 
taken up into the body of 
the resurfacing machine, 
mixed with new materials 
and then immediately laid 
back on the lower surface 
of the road. This is then 
topped with new surface 
asphalt. This process uses 
less material resources, 
requires fewer vehicle 
movements on the site and 
less waste going to landfill.April 2021 To be determined once 
data becomes availableComplete Source of action: Employee suggestion, best 
practice research
Action Plan Ref key (n) = new actionAction Plan Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral44Ref Action Completion year Estimated annual carbon 
savings (tCO 2e)Status Update/Source of New Action
62 
(n)Pursue PAS 2060 
accreditation for the Council 
– an international standard 
for carbon neutrality.December 2022 The savings from 
gaining the accreditation 
would come from this 
action plan.New action Source of action: Employee suggestion
63 
(n)Council to apply 
for Investors in the 
EnvironmentApril 2023 The savings from 
gaining the accreditation 
would come from this 
action plan.New action - 
to be startedSource of action: Employee suggestion
Communications and training
64 Roll out Climate Change 
learning and development 
programme through OLLIE 
for staff and membersApril 2022 Raising awareness 
on climate change 
and carbon reduction 
measures reduces energy 
usage by staff of between 
10-15% which equates 
to 239 tonnes CO2e.In progress Source of action: Member drop-in session.
Training is currently being reviewed with a view to 
launching the course by April 2021.
65 
(n)Introduce environmental 
scorecard Dashboard at 
Director level to show 
energy usage, mileage, 
printing etc.April 2023 Raising awareness 
on climate change 
and carbon reduction 
measures reduces the 
Council’s carbon footprintComplete Source of action: best practice research.
Already introduced and will be reported monthly to the 
Senior Management Team as part of a new Managing 
the Business performance dashboardAction Plan Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral45Ref Action Completion year Estimated annual carbon 
savings (tCO 2e)Status Update/Source of New Action
66 Ensure that all employee 
benefits that would 
contribute to our carbon 
reduction and carbon 
offsetting targets are clearly 
identified in our employee 
benefits package.April 2022 Cannot be quantified at 
this point.In progress Review to be undertaken. 
Council resources/waste
67 Commence a food 
recycling service in 
Addenbrooke then roll out 
to other Council buildings 
with the potential to also 
engage schools.April 2022 Circa 1.25 tonnes of 
CO2 saved per monthOn Hold Food collections were rolled out to the three main 
Council office buildings (Addenbrooke House, Darby 
House and Wellington Civic Offices) on the 13th January 
2020 and the service ran for ten weeks before the 
lockdown. Circa 2.5 tonnes of food waste was collected.
A temporary suspension to the service has been put 
in place, as the offices are closed, albeit open to a 
limited number of Officers. This will be kept under 
review so the service can be restarted once Offices are 
fully open to staff.
Action Plan Ref key (n) = new actionAction Plan Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral46Ref Action Completion year Estimated annual carbon 
savings (tCO 2e)Status Update/Source of New Action
Borough resources/waste
68 
(n)Community compost bin 
schemeApril 2022 The carbon savings 
brought about by the 
action will count towards 
reducing the Borough’s 
carbon impact.In progress Source of action: Resident’s survey, best practice 
research.
69 
(n)Explore Warp-it Re-use 
scheme - to find, give 
away, or loan office 
furniture, equipment and 
other resourcesApril 2025 The carbon savings 
brought about by the 
action will count towards 
reducing the Borough’s 
carbon impact.New action Source of action: Resident’s SurveyAction Plan Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral47Ref Action Completion year Estimated annual carbon 
savings (tCO 2e)Status Update/Source of New Action
70
(n)Working in partnership with 
Town/Parish Councils, local 
business and stakeholders, 
the Council will begin by 
installing dual-recycling bins 
across high footfall areas 
(including but not limited to 
Oakengates, Newport and 
Wellington) in the Borough 
including Telford Town Park 
and the Borough’s Parks. 
Following detailed review 
and evaluation of this initial 
trial, the on-going provision 
of dual-recycling litter bins 
will be considered for a 
programme of further roll out.April 2025 Cannot be quantified at 
this point.New action Source of action: Environment Scrutiny Committee, 
Member drop-in session.
Action Plan Ref key (n) = new actionAction Plan Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral48Ref Action Completion year Estimated annual carbon 
savings (tCO 2e)Status Update/Source of New Action
Council land use, biodiversity and carbon sequestration
71 Publication of a draft Local 
Nature Recovery Strategy 
(LNRS) for the borough.  At 
a minimum the draft Local 
Nature Recovery Strategy 
will set out proposals to 
enhance, restore or create 
up to: 
 15ha of heathland
 30ha of species rich 
grassland, and
 25ha of wetlands
 on land in the direct 
ownership of the 
Council.April 2022 The calculations below 
are based upon evidence 
presented in Rewilding 
Britain (2019) Rewildling 
and Climate Breakdown: 
How Restoring Nature 
Can Help Decarbonise 
the UK. 
Heathland
Assuming a 
sequestration rate of
2 tonnes/ha/year.
2x3.66 = 7.32 tCO2e/
ha/a
7.32x 15ha = 109.8 
tCO2e/aIn progress Nature Recovery Strategy (NRS)
 Continuing to track the progress of the 
Environment Bill which has stalled during the 
national Covid-19 response. 
 Bill progress will dictate the future Cabinet pipeline. 
 Officers are drafting elements of the strategy whilst 
monitoring Bill progress
 Telford & Wrekin Council now registered with 
DEFRA/Natural England as a ‘nature recovery 
delivery partner’
 Telford & Wrekin Council secured £1400 seed 
funding from Natural England to launch a habitat 
mapping project with volunteers and local 
specialists (this will feed into the NRS) Action Plan Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral49Ref Action Completion year Estimated annual carbon 
savings (tCO 2e)Status Update/Source of New Action
Species Rich 
Grassland
Assuming a 
sequestration rate of
1 tonne of carbon/ha/
year.
1x3.66 = 3.66 tCO2e/
ha/a
3.66x30ha = 109.8 
tCO2e/a
Wetlands
Assuming a 
sequestration rate of
1.4 tonnes of carbon/ha/
year.
1.4x3.66 = 5.124 tCO2e/
ha/a
5.124x25ha = 128.1 
tCO2e/aHabitat delivery
 Tests and trials underway at The Granville
 70ha habitat creation will be delivered Borough-
wide in 2021
 Green Recovery Challenge Fund bid with national 
charity ‘buglife’ has been successful to help deliver 
grassland enhancements at Rough Park Meadow
Action Plan Ref key (n) = new actionAction Plan Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral50Ref Action Completion year Estimated annual carbon 
savings (tCO 2e)Status Update/Source of New Action
72 The draft Local Nature 
Recovery Strategy will 
also assess the Council’s 
woodland landholding, 
developing an evidence 
based, Borough-wide 
strategy for woodland 
management. The draft 
Local Nature Recovery 
Strategy will:
 Increase the accuracy of 
the mapping of Telford 
& Wrekin Council’s 
woodland landholding, 
increasing the accuracy 
of the measurement 
of the boroughs tree 
canopy cover
 Calculate estimates 
of the carbon stored 
within existing Telford 
& Wrekin Council 
woodland stockDecember 2022 Carbon sequestration 
rates within existing 
Telford & Wrekin Council 
woodland:
Telford & Wrekin 
Council’s woodland 
landholding sequesters 
an average of 10,697 
tonnes/CO2e/ha/year 
non traded carbon cost 
of £706,002 a year.
Borough-wide woodland 
is sequestering on 
average 36,431 tCO2e/yr 
non traded carbon value 
of £2,404,446 a yearIn progress The Council now has accurate data, the borough has a 
15% canopy cover – higher than the national average
Mapping opportunities for woodland restoration, 
restructuring, natural woodland generation and new 
planting - drafted with final versions being available in 
Q1 2021.
Identify opportunities to engage with third party land 
holders scoping opportunities for wider woodland planting 
at a borough scale - public engagement and outreach via 
the Trees4TW scheme has identified a number of local 
land owners keen to re-wild their landholdings.Action Plan Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral51Ref Action Completion year Estimated annual carbon 
savings (tCO 2e)Status Update/Source of New Action
 Calculate estimates 
of the current carbon 
sequestration rates 
within existing Telford 
& Wrekin Council 
woodland                                                         
 Map opportunities for 
woodland restoration, 
restructuring, natural 
woodland generation 
and new planting.
 Scope the potential to 
create a series of new 
community forests 
to increase carbon 
sequestration and 
reflecting the Council’s 
commitment to being a 
‘Forest Community.
 Identify opportunities to 
engage with third party 
land holders to scope 
opportunities for wider 
woodland planting at a 
borough scale.
Action Plan Ref key (n) = new actionAction Plan Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral52Ref Action Completion year Estimated annual carbon 
savings (tCO 2e)Status Update/Source of New Action
73 Working in partnership with 
Natural England, Telford & 
Wrekin Council will deliver 
great crested newt district 
level licensing across the 
borough. This scheme 
will involve the strategic 
restoration and creation 
of pond networks at a 
landscape scale.April 2022 Recent studies have 
shown that ponds 
can sequester carbon 
at an average rate of 
1.4 tonnes/ha/year, 
which equates to 5.124 
tCO2et/ha/a
Assuming a 
sequestration rate of
1.4 tonnes of carbon/
ha/year. 1.4x3.66 = 
5.124 tCO2e/ha/a 2019 
estimated 0.16 ha = 
0.82 tCO2e/ha/aComplete GCN licencing operational 2020Action Plan Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral53Ref Action Completion year Estimated annual carbon 
savings (tCO 2e)Status Update/Source of New Action
74 
(n)Community Forest – 
planting on Telford & 
Wrekin Council-owned 
land. A tree will be planted 
for every child in reception 
class as part of community 
forest vision.April 2025 Calculation based on:
 tree planting spacing 
of 2.5m 
 All trees are planted 
in one place
Therefore looking at 
1600 trees per hectare.
So 2,153 trees 2.5m 
apart would fit in 1.3 ha. 
Assuming a 9.14 
t/CO2e/ha/yr 
sequestration rate. 
That’s 1.3ha x 9.14 = 
11.9 t/CO2e/ha/yr. New action Source of action: Resident’s survey, Member 
suggestion, best practice research
Action Plan Ref key (n) = new actionAction Plan Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral54Ref Action Completion year Estimated annual carbon 
savings (tCO 2e)Status Update/Source of New Action
Borough land use, biodiversity and carbon sequestration
75 
(n)Work with the Telford and 
Wrekin Borough Climate 
Change Partnership for 
the Borough to become a 
Sustainable Food PlaceApril 2025 The carbon savings 
brought about by the 
action will count towards 
reducing the Borough’s 
carbon impact.New action Source of action: best practice research, Resident’s 
survey, member suggestion
The Sustainable Food Places Award recognises and 
celebrates the success of those places taking a joined 
up, holistic approach to food including achievements in 
promoting and normalising healthy and sustainable food.
76 
(n)Phase 2 of Trees4TW April 2022 The carbon savings 
brought about by the 
action will count towards 
reducing the Borough’s 
carbon impact.New action Source of action: Employee suggestion, best practice 
research, Resident’s survey
In Phase 1 of the Trees4TW, the Council has so far 
distributed: 560 whips to schools; 385 whips to 
homeowners and 5,360 whips to landowners with a 
further circa 800 to be distributed.
77 
(n)Exploring accreditation 
schemes for biodiversity off-
set eg carbon credits and 
the woodland carbon codeApril 2025 The carbon savings 
brought about by the 
action will count towards 
reducing the Borough’s 
carbon impact.New action Source of action: Employee suggestion, best 
practice researchAction Plan Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral55Ref Action Completion year Estimated annual carbon 
savings (tCO 2e)Status Update/Source of New Action
78 
(n)Developments to contribute 
towards the maintenance 
and/or extension of 
the Borough’s Canopy 
Cover through various 
mechanisms to be defined 
through the Local PlanApril 2025 The carbon savings 
brought about by the 
action will count towards 
reducing the Borough’s 
carbon impact.New action Source of action: Employee suggestion, best practice 
research, Resident’s survey
79 
(n)Re-introduce Depave to 
build on existing projects 
with community centres to 
remove hardstanding areas 
and replace with garden/
green space.April 2022 The carbon savings 
brought about by the 
action will count towards 
reducing the Borough’s 
carbon impact.New action Source of action: Employee suggestion
Action Plan Ref key (n) = new actionAction Plan Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral56Ref Action Completion year Estimated annual carbon 
savings (tCO 2e)Status Update/Source of New Action
80 
(n)Schools and Council Café 
to offer meat-free options 
once a weekApril 2022 The carbon savings 
brought about by the 
action will count towards 
reducing the Borough’s 
carbon impact.In progress Source of action: Resident’s survey, best practice 
research, member suggestion.
In schools that use the Council’s Catering Service, 
Let’s Dine, there is a daily vegetarian option and vegan 
meals are available on request.  There are also meat-
free days most weeks.  The menus are continuing to 
be updated so that more of the vegetarian options 
are vegan, and the Eatwell team that promote healthy 
eating in schools also use vegan products when 
cooking with the children.  The Catering Service 
participated in Veganuary in 2021, and plans to trial 
vegan theme days this year.Action Plan Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral Becoming  carbon  neutral57Asks of Government
Telford & Wrekin Council will continue to call for increased ambition from 
Government in tackling Climate Change at a national level, and lobby for 
more support and funding to achieve our carbon neutral target by 2030. 
Delivering our ambitions for Telford & Wrekin is absolutely dependent on 
Government action, and a step change in policy, investment and regulatory 
powers is required to achieve our vision of ‘A thriving, carbon neutral, 
climate resilient community where all our local residents and organisations 
actively contribute to and benefit from a more sustainable future’.
Whilst the Council welcomes the new national funding schemes that have 
been launched this year, such as the Public Sector Decarbonisation Fund, 
our experience has been that funds are often oversubscribed or have 
unrealistic deadlines. Whilst we will continue to proactively submit funding 
bids, and encourage others in Telford & Wrekin to do so, the Government 
needs to do much more to drive the change needed and at pace, and 
to provide additional financial support to mitigate the significant ‘new 
burdens’ being placed on local authorities as a result of growing concern 
and public pressure about Climate Change.Our 10 asks of Government are:
 Increase its funding to local authorities to deliver carbon reduction targets;
 Allow a greater amount of time for authorities to bid for and complete 
projects through Government climate change funding, and apply less 
prescriptive criteria to funding, to enable larger and more innovative 
schemes to be delivered;
 Strengthen Building Regulations to allow a faster transition to low 
carbon development;
 Remove barriers to community renewable energy schemes e.g. no 
NNDR on solar panels, extension of Renewable Heat Incentive Scheme;
 Set explicit decarbonisation objectives for Ofgem to allow for strategic 
grid reinforcement;
 Make a commitment to increase renewable energy generation 
nationally, with clear targets and financial support;
 Bring forward legislation in the form of carbon taxation to incentivise 
behaviour change based on the polluter pays principle;
 Bring forward the commitment to ban the sale of new diesel and petrol 
vehicles to 2030;
 Incentivise low carbon agriculture;
 Increase the budget for national Climate Change research and innovation.Telford and Wr ekin
Protect, Car e and In vest
to create a bett er bor ough