COUNCIL PLAN
2020-2025Warwickshire County CouncilWe all want to make Warwickshire the best it can be - 
for everyone who lives, works, visits and does business 
here. We want people to have the best lives and enjoy 
the best opportunities, and to secure the best, 
sustainable future for everyone.
Our county, with its vibrant mix of towns and rural 
areas, heritage and culture, businesses of all sizes and 
great connectivity, is brimming with opportunities.
But our world is also facing significant challenges. Our 
economy, now vibrant, must be sustained. Traditional 
sources of council funding are diminishing. And our 
environment is under threat. The Council has declared a 
climate emergency and we will focus on what we can 
do to to meet the goal of carbon neutrality to protect 
our environment now and for future generations.   
We want to make the most of those opportunities and 
tackle those challenges by working with you, our 
partners and our communities to build on the strengths 
we already have. By combining our collective skills, 
assets and connections we will achieve our ambition to 
make Warwickshire the best it can be.Welcome
We know we face pressures arising from meeting 
increasing demand for services and our resources, 
particularly in adult and children’s social care, special 
educational needs and disability, and waste. We will 
ensure the Council makes the best use of its resources 
to achieve our ambitions in a way that protects the 
interests of future generations. We will invest in 
prevention and support at the right time, to make sure 
we can manage the increasing pressures on our 
services. We will also look to reduce the environmental 
impact of what we do and how we do it.
Our strategic approach and decision making around 
service design will be based on evidence and data. We 
will work with partners and the community to ensure 
we build on strengths and networks that already exist, 
and our focus will be on prevention and self care. 
We will need to work in innovative and radically 
different ways and to make the best use of 
opportunities offered by digital solutions and emerging 
technologies.
We are looking at a number of ways to use 
commercial investments and skills to enhance our 
services, and to secure new physical assets in order to 
improve the county's infrastructure.   
We are tackling these challenges from a strong base. 
We manage our finances responsibly; our staff are 
engaged, committed and passionate about delivering 
the best possible outcomes for our communities. We 
work with partners who share our ambition. We 
recognise that within our communities there are skills, 
resources, relationships and networks that we can 
build on so that we make the most of our strengths 
and collective assets to make Warwickshire the best it 
can be, now and for future generations.
Our Council Plan 2020–25 sets out our priority 
areas for action and how we will achieve them. In 
short, we want people to stay safe, and be healthy, 
independent and engaged with their communities. 
And we want a vibrant economy: an environment 
where businesses can thrive and everyone has 
access to jobs and training, and where there is a 
transport infrastructure that allows everyone to 
access these opportunities. Underpinning all this 
we want to address the long-term challenge of 
climate change.
Cllr Izzi Seccombe
Leader,
Warwickshire County CouncilMonica Fogarty
Chief Executive, 
Warwickshire County Council
2Reduce demand and 
reduce cost through 
innovative service 
design and focussed 
prevention 
interventionsWork with communities to 
promote safety, prevent 
harm and reduce crime and 
disorder across 
WarwickshireSupport and enable children and 
young people to access a place in 
a high quality education setting 
and achieve their full potentialManage and maintain 
Warwickshire’s transport 
network in a safe, sustainable 
and integrated wayIncrease reuse, recycling and 
composting rates and reduce 
waste across WarwickshireAttract economic 
investment and maximise 
the rate of employment, 
business growth and skill 
levels in WarwickshireSupport communities and 
businesses to develop the 
digital skills and tools they 
need in an increasingly digital 
economy
Make it easy for 
customers to access 
our information and 
services so they have 
a positive experience 
of our servicesPut our resources in the right place 
to support the organisation’s 
priorities and balance the books 
Develop our workforce so that it has 
the right skills and capabilities to 
get the job done
Pursue leadership excellence and 
high performance at all levelsSupport Warwickshire 
residents to take 
responsibility for their own 
health and wellbeing and 
reduce the need for hospital 
or long term health careSupport the most vulnerable 
and disadvantaged adults in 
Warwickshire to enjoy life; 
achieve and live 
independentlySupport our most vulnerable 
and disadvantaged children, 
providing early support, 
before situations become 
complexTo make 
Warwickshire the 
best it can be, 
sustainable now 
and for future 
generations
Making the best use 
of resources
Our vision - what we are aiming to 
achieve
As part of our response to climate change, we 
make sure our work is in-line with the UN 
Sustainable Development Goals 
Warwickshire’s communities 
and individuals are supported 
to be safe, healthy and 
independent
PRIORITY OUTCOME
Warwickshire’s economy is 
vibrant and supported by the 
right jobs, training, skills and 
infrastructure
PRIORITY OUTCOME
SUPPORTED BY2
33                                                    
Looking forward Looking back - what we have achieved  
Delivering our objectives
What this will mean for you5
6
12
Our Plan – how this works 
Our Council Plan 2020–25 sets our ambition for Warwickshire over the next ﬁve years.  
It reflects on the achievements we have made so far and gives a robust assessment of the challenges and 
opportunities we face over the next ﬁve years as both a county and County Council. 
We have listened carefully to your views and shaped a set of outcomes, which we believe respond to the 
priorities you have set for us as a County Council. 
Under each of these outcomes sits a series of objectives, which translate our ambition into practice. These 
will inform the strategies we set and the way we commission and deliver services on your behalf. The plan 
sets out a page for each, showing what this will mean for you as customers and residents.  
Our performance frameworks will ensure we monitor progress. We will annually review our progress and 
ensure our direction remains relevant and right.   
For staff, our Council Plan will provide a reference point for all our work and a holistic view of our work 
priorities.  
For the public, our Council Plan will set out what you can expect from us and how this will improve the places 
you live in, your communities and your wellbeing. Contents
Our vision - what we are aiming to achieve
What could Warwickshire look like in 2025?
Responding to climate change
Our action on climate change  
Transforming the Council
Funding and investment
Delivering on your feedback
4Looking back - what we have achieved
Our previous Council Plan covered three years from 2017 to 2020. We accomplished a lot 
during this time. Here are just a few of our achievements: 
2019/20 
represents the 
final year of our 
three year 
financial plan. 
This has 
required us to 
deliver...
89% By the end of 
2018/19 we 
delivered 
£37.7m of the 
£42.4m due 
by this date, 
this is... ...and we continue to deliver 
high quality services for the 
people and communities of 
Warwickshire. We have plans in 
place to deliver £14.2 million in 
2019/20 and a further £1.9 
million in 2020/21.£58.5
million
savings 
over the 
period. Major infrastructure projects delivered, resulting in 
national recognition 
Kenilworth and Bermuda railway stations 
M40 junction 12 dual carriageway link 
Skills for Employment success 
Services have helped to equip 
over 30,000 young people with 
workplace readiness skills. Warwickshire Education Strategy launched 
Improving educational outcomes of learners 
of all ages 
Business hubs and small business grants and 
loans 
Have helped 300 Warwickshire businesses 
to thrive 
of planned 
savings... Recruited more social workers to support 
children and families 
29 %We have increased our number of social 
workers by 29%, ensuring better 
outcomes for children and young people Fitter Futures Warwickshire launched 
Supporting people across the 
county to improve their health Warwickshire Multi-Agency Safeguarding 
Hub created 
Council services, Police, NHS and 
other key agencies were brought together to 
safeguard children, young people and adults 
Adoption Central England launched 
Bringing together local authorities of Coventry, 
Solihull, Warwickshire, Worcestershire and 
Herefordshire 
4,500 Safe and Well checks delivered 
annually 
By our Fire and Rescue service to protect 
vulnerable residents 
Our Ask Warwickshire website refreshed 
The new site has  a more user-friendly 
experience for anyone wanting to take part 
in consultation and  engagement activity 
Reablement service continues to help 
customers to live independently 
Service praised for quality of care and 
improvements it makes to people’s lives 71,000 properties across the region able to 
connect to fibre network 
Thanks to work of the Connecting Solihull and 
Warwickshire Broadband project 
Digital improvements 
Our new-look website, with updated content 
and features, offers an improved experience 
for our customers Positive inspection outcomes for our services 
Including Warwickshire Fire and Rescue, 
Youth Justice and Reablement 2
5Awareness of crimes such as cybercrime 
and those linked with exploitation has 
increased, which will increase reporting.
Faster broadband and the pilot of 
5G across the West Midlands 
region will beneﬁt business, public 
services and society.The largest 
employment growth 
will be in real estate 
(12.2%), electronics 
(10.6%), head ofﬁces 
and management 
consultancy (10.6%) 
and food and beverage 
(10.2%) industries.7,800  
more jobs - an
increase of 
2.4% by 2025.  
84 years
for females and 80 years
for males.Growth in the use of self-driving, 
electric and hybrid vehicles.An increasing 
proportion of crime 
will continue to be 
linked to or 
facilitated by 
technology, e.g. 
cybercrime.
Artiﬁcial intelligence, 
predictive analytics and 
robotics will become 
increasingly important 
in service delivery and 
improvement.
Due to population growth and an 
estimated 19,000 new dwellings 
across Warwickshire, it is 
estimated that by 2025 
the school age 
population will 
increase
by approximately It is estimated that there will be 
579,095
residents in Warwickshire by 2025.
or just over  8,000 people 
compared with 2018.
We will need to provide close to an 
additional 6,000 school places.1.4 %This represents 
an increase of 
nearly  
The 70+  age 
group will 
increase by around14%
and the 85+ 
population will 
grow by around 22%
In 2025 the motor vehicle 
manufacturing industry is expected 
to be Warwickshire’s most 
competitive and concentrated 
industry. Business administration 
and support services, retail, 
education, construction and the 
logistics sector will employ the 
most people.
It is likely that by 2025 life 
expectancy will be around Looking forward - what could 
Warwickshire look like in 2025?
9%Unless addressed the skills 
available in the current resident 
workforce may not meet the 
needs of employersOur analysis of data suggests the following trends and how these might impact on services.
There will be 
more walking 
and cycling 
corridorsThere will be more 
journeys on our 
network due to 
increased population 
people aged 65 and over will 
be living in a care home (both 
Local Authority and non-LA) 
with or without nursing - an 
increase of 20% from 2019 
estimates.Approximately
There will 
also be an 
increase in 
unpaid 
carers 4,300Dementia represents the 
biggest growing cause 
of disability and rates 
are predicted to 
increase by 
in people 
aged 65 
and over. 17
Warwickshire will also 
see an increase in 
mental health
issues. %
However, recent government 
strategy aims to minimise 
waste and maximise reuse, 
recycling and composting. 
This could radically change 
the way waste is managed 
by 2025.The quantity of waste 
being managed will 
increase due to housing 
and business growth.
6Looking forward - responding to 
climate change
Climate change and carbon reduction 
The Council has declared a climate emergency. Initially we set up a climate change adaptation task and 
finish group to address what we can and must do to create a sustainable environment now, and for 
future generations. Basing its recommendations on the Met Office’s UK climate projections for 2050, 
the group has used this data to prioritise options and schemes that come forward for investment. A 
climate impact assessment for Warwickshire is being prepared. 
We engaged with you directly about climate change in developing this Council Plan, and received a lot 
of constructive feedback. More than a third of you who responded to our survey said increasing re-use, 
recycling and compost rates and reducing waste are priorities.  
To take this forward, the Council will establish a cross-party group to steer the work that will deliver 
both climate change adaptation and mitigation.
As an organisation we will embed climate change 
considerations into everything we do, making carbon 
reduction everyone’s responsibility. Climate change will be 
considered as part of all council decision making including 
our capital investments and procurement processes. We 
will ensure we have the right information to enable us to 
prioritise our decision making based on understanding our 
own emissions and how this impacts on Warwickshire. We 
will look at best practice to inform our own benchmarking 
and target setting, helping us to prioritise and plan 
accordingly. We will work collaboratively with Government 
to provide guidance and incentives for carbon reduction. 
As part of our response to climate change, we make sure our 
work is in-line with the UN Sustainable Development Goals 
7Looking forward - our action on 
climate change
Through implementation of a Carbon Management Action Plan, the Council has reduced its carbon 
dioxide emissions from electricity consumption by 43% and gas consumption by 1% in its operational 
properties between 2015/16 and 2018/19. Without these actions and changes in staff behaviour the 
Council's emissions would have increased by 0.7% year on year to 2033. 
Petrol and diesel carbon dioxide emissions consumed within Warwickshire for council owned vehicles 
has reduced by 21% between 2013/14 and 2018/19. 
Across Warwickshire carbon dioxide emissions from general waste disposal, per head of population, has 
reduced by 4% from 2013/14 to 2018/19, through householders’ efforts to reduce waste and recycle 
more. 
Since 2011/12, a combination of part-night lighting and LED lantern installation saw the Council's carbon 
dioxide emissions for street lighting reduce by 76%.Our progress so far
8Emissions the Council has direct 
control over including own 
transport, gas and bought 
electricity. By 2030, or sooner… 
 We will ensure our staff, 
contractors, customers and 
visitors are clear how they 
contribute to minimising the 
Council’s carbon impact. 
 We will reduce our energy 
consumption by improving 
the energy efficiency of our 
buildings and make our 
corporate buildings carbon 
neutral. 
 We will substantially increase 
our renewable energy 
generation, continue to 
purchase 100% green 
electricity and make the 
Council’s transport fleet 
carbon neutral. 
 We will partner with our 
communities to plant a tree 
for every Warwickshire 
resident. Emissions the Council has indirect 
control over i.e. emissions from 
purchased goods and services, 
waste management, business travel, 
employee commuting and 
investments 
 We will reduce, recycle and 
compost more of our office and 
household waste, and reduce our 
use of paper and single use 
plastic. 
 We will develop and implement a 
new joint waste strategy for 
Warwickshire and work with 
partners to review the carbon 
impact of our investments. 
 We will embrace and embed 
improved ICT to reduce energy 
consumption, printing and 
business travel, including 
commuting. 
 We will provide zero carbon pool 
vehicles and encourage their use 
among staff. We will also provide 
improved shower and storage 
facilities to promote and 
encourage active travel. 
 We will develop our plans to 
reduce carbon emissions from 
our third-party contracts for 
highways, property and social 
services and investigate carbon 
reductions in non-corporate 
buildings. Across Warwickshire – emissions 
from all households and 
businesses including all burnt 
fossil fuels and energy used for 
power, heating and transport. The 
Council has some influence over 
these emissions. By 2030, or 
sooner… 
 We will review and agree the 
new local transport plan and 
area transport strategies to 
encourage healthy lifestyles 
and more sustainable 
transport, including cycling. 
 We will develop smart 
transport targets to reduce 
carbon and improve air quality, 
especially in built-up areas. 
 We will let a contract for and 
provide charging points for 
electric vehicles. 
 We will work with local 
businesses and communities 
to help them reduce their 
carbon emissions and become 
more sustainable 
 We will seek to achieve net 
gain for habitat, benefiting 
climate change mitigation and 
adaptation. Looking forward - transforming the 
Council through our change 
programme
The Council performs well in most areas and is financially stable, but demand for our 
services continues to increase, Warwickshire’s population has grown by 5% in the past 
decade, with a further 5% projected increase over the next. This, combined with changes in 
how local government is financed, means that we must get fit for the future. We need to 
transform how we do things in order to deliver great services that are both affordable and 
sustainable into the future. 
We have adopted a commissioning-led 
approach, meaning that we are reducing the 
cost of delivering services and designing them 
specifically to address local need. This will 
release staff capacity, reduce costs and 
improve productivity. We will increase our 
commercial activity to enhance delivery of our 
outcomes, deliver a positive return and sustain 
our finances. 
The Council has adopted a new operating 
model in order to deliver its outcomes and 
objectives successfully as a high performance 
council. It will focus the whole organisation on 
a single strategic direction. It will address the 
projected growth in demand for our services 
and efficient service delivery based on need. 
Our new operating model will increase the 
proportion of time spent on service delivery rather than its management. It will support 
us by removing duplicated and fragmented 
systems and processes. We will take a clear 
and consistent approach to data, so that  
decisions are more robust and based on local 
need. 
We will adopt a new approach to demand for 
our services and place digital at the heart of 
our relationship with our customers. We will 
reshape the services we provide by having 
new ways for customers to interact with us 
and ensure no customers are disadvantaged.
All of this amounts to a major transformation 
of the Council, which has led us into a 
programme of continuous change in the way 
we do things, backed up with a total focus on 
high performance.
“We have adopted a commissioning led 
approach meaning that we are reducing the 
cost to deliver services and designing them 
to speciﬁcally address local need. ”
9Ensuring a sustainable ﬁnancial future
Local authorities are required by law to have a 
balanced budget. For us this means a sustainable 
balanced budget based on sound assumptions, 
which shows how income will equal spend over 
the short and medium term i.e. the five years of 
the 2020-25 Council Plan. 
The Council produces a rolling five-year 
Medium-Term Financial Strategy. This helps us to 
plan ahead, so we are able to meet our spending 
requirements, taking into account both 
government grants and council tax income. The 
Financial Strategy helps us do this in a planned 
and careful way so we are able to provide good 
quality services for our residents. Where 
appropriate, we will invest in physical assets to 
benefit those who live in, work, and visit the 
county.Looking forward - funding and 
investment
 2020-21
total
£’0002021-22
total
£’0002022-23
total
£’0002023-24
total
£’0002024-25
total
£’000
 Funding
Government 
grants71,729 39,346 39,346 39,346 39,346
Use of reserves 899 1,116 1,976 2,366 1,455
Business rates 71,199 95,877 97,795 99,750 101,746
Council tax 313,619 326,272 339,445 353,154 367,420
Total Resources 457,446 462,611 478,562 489,884 509,967
Spending on 
council services413,639 439,554 455,998 473,572 490,616
'SWXSJMRƽEXMSR 11,678 11,001 11,409 11,633 11,941
Spending on 
new services38,338 17,623 18,462 15,542 15,508
Less savings 
from 
IƾGMIRGMIWERH
transformation(6,209) (5,567) (7,307) (6,131) (8,098)
Total Spending 457,446 462,611 478,562 494,616 509,967Warwickshire County Council is becoming more 
commercially minded in running its services. This 
change reflects one of the key drivers of our change 
programme and will help us make better use of our 
resources to deliver the outcomes our residents have 
helped prioritise. 
The Medium-Term Financial Strategy will require 
regular reviews in order to remain dynamic, robust, 
ambitious, and deliverable, and will be updated at 
least annually.
We use reserves to manage financial risk and 
promote financial sustainability. Any reserves not 
needed to manage financial risk are used for 
time-limited investment to support the delivery of the 
Council’s objectives or to deliver savings and reduce 
demand in future years. This will ensure the 
Medium-Term Financial Strategy for 2020 - 2025 will 
be fully balanced on an ongoing basis.
“The Financial 
Strategy helps 
us do this in a 
planned and 
careful way so 
we are able to 
provide good 
quality 
services for 
our residents”
10Looking forward - delivering on your 
feedback
Over 1,000 people responded. You told us 
that our key priorities should be to: 
• support vulnerable children and adults; 
• ensure access to high quality education 
settings and opportunities; 
• make sure we have a good transport 
network including highways, public 
transport and active travel (walking and 
cycling); 
• respond to climate change and your 
environmental concerns including 
recycling and reducing waste; 
• support public health and wellbeing; and
• manage our resources efficiently and 
sustainably. Feedback from you has enabled us to 
ensure that our outcomes meet your 
priorities. Of the responses received, your 
top three priorities were:
• support vulnerable children and adults; 
• make sure we have a good transport 
network including highways, public 
transport and active travel (walking and 
cycling); and
• respond to climate change and your 
environmental concerns including 
recycling and reducing waste.
We have recently adopted a 
commissioning approach to the delivery of 
our services, which has resulted in a 
complete review of our Performance 
Framework. We have identified new 
performance measures, which provide a 
sharpened focus on performance, linked to 
the organisation’s priorities. 
It is important that we 
measure and share 
our performance 
with you through 
regular 
performance 
updates. In developing this plan, it was important for us to know what is important to you. In 
autumn 2019 we ran a series of drop-in roadshows for people across Warwickshire and 
hosted an online questionnaire to capture your thoughts and priorities. 
We asked you what you thought we should focus on as a council over the coming five 
years. Based on our engagement with the people of Warwickshire, we are confident that 
our outcomes and objectives support your priorities.
These priorities 
currently account 
for 76% of our 
budget. 
11 We will support families to give children the 
best start in life and focus on their strengths. 
We will build trusted and connected 
relationships with children and families that will 
lead to better outcomes. 
 We will ensure that families, communities and 
partner organisations know how to access high 
quality information and advice.  
 
 We will build local partnerships around our 
Children and Family Centres, so that families 
can drop in, attend courses and access support 
from the Council and partner organisations.  
We will ensure that the most vulnerable 
children and young people are protected from 
harm and exploitation. It is a shared 
responsibility of families, communities, the 
Council and partner organisations to ensure 
children are protected from abuse and neglect. 
 
 We will help children to live in safe and 
supportive families. We will ensure that 
families receive as much support as possible 
to achieve this. 
 We will ensure children in care are supported to 
achieve stability and build positive relationships 
with their families and carers. Our foster carers 
are vital and we will work to increase 
recruitment and provide support for them. 
 We will remain focused on preventing young 
people from offending and re-offending.  
 We will encourage all children to participate in 
learning and improve achievements for all.
 We will help young people to develop life skills 
and be ready for work. 
In 2021 we will open a new special educational 
needs school, based in Exhall, which will 
provide places for 80 children.
 Support our most vulnerable and disadvantaged 
children, providing early support, before 
situations become complex
What this will mean for you:
More children will live safely at home with their 
families. 
There will be more safe and fun places to go for 
family time.  
We will have sufﬁcient, high quality foster care and 
residential placements to meet the needs of our 
children in care. 
 
Fewer children and young people will enter the 
criminal justice system. 
You will be able to access new technologies in 
non-educational environments. 
Provision of year round access to learning and 
educational opportunities.  
Children and young people will have access to the 
support they need to maintain their emotional health. 
Warwickshire’s communities and individuals are supported to be safe, healthy and independent 12Support the most vulnerable and disadvantaged 
adults in Warwickshire to enjoy life, achieve and 
live independently
 We will work with our partner organisations to 
ensure people have access to the support 
and information they need and, where 
possible, are able to manage their own 
support.
 People with care and support needs will be 
treated with respect, dignity and sensitivity to 
their individual circumstances.
 Focusing on strengths and maintaining 
independence is our goal. People with care 
and support needs will be able to find 
employment, maintain a family life, contribute 
to community life and avoid loneliness or 
isolation. They will receive the care and 
support they need in the most appropriate 
place – often at home. 
 Communities will know what choices are 
available to them locally, what they are 
entitled to and who to contact when they 
need help. 
 Carers will be supported to maintain a good 
quality of life and will be respected as equal 
partners. 
 We will work together with partner 
organisations so that people and their carers 
are less dependent on intensive services.  
What this will mean for you:
You will have easy access to accurate 
information to enable you to maintain your 
independence.  
When we talk to you, we will focus on what 
matters to you, your personal networks, your 
strengths and the things available to you in 
your community. 
You will be connected to the things availabe 
to you in your community, (both formal and 
informal) through information and advice and 
social prescribing. 
Your needs as a carer will be listened to, as 
well as the needs of those you care for. 
You will see the County Council and NHS 
working together to help prevent your needs 
increasing.
Warwickshire’s communities and individuals are supported to be safe, healthy and independent 13
DRAFTSupport Warwickshire residents to take 
responsibility for their own health and wellbeing 
and reduce the need for hospital or long-term 
health care
What this will mean for you:
You will be supported to take responsibility for your 
own health, and you will see an increase your healthy 
life expectancy. 
You will see evidence that the health inequalities gap 
is reducing across Warwickshire. 
There will be a noticable improvement in mental health 
and well-being, and you will be able to access 
community support if you have mental health issues, 
dementia or are feeling lonely. 
If you are living with long-term conditions, you will be 
able to self-care and self-manage your conditions, 
reducing your reliance on secondary care.
You will not have to stay in hospital longer than you 
need to, because support will be available to you, at 
home, sooner.
You will live in a safe environment that is connected to 
your community, with good air quality and 
opportunities for physical activity.   
 
You will receive seamless health and care support. We will prioritise promoting healthy lifestyles 
to improve quality of life, life expectancy and 
healthy life expectancy.
 We will tackle the causes of health-related 
problems to reduce the impact of ill health 
and inequalities on people’s lives, their 
families and communities.
 We will focus on the mental health and 
wellbeing of people of all ages living in 
Warwickshire, in particular those who are 
lonely or isolated, have mental illness or 
dementia.
 We will support people with long-term health 
conditions such as diabetes, cancer and heart 
disease to manage their conditions, maintain 
quality of life and to receive high quality end of 
life care where needed.
 Where people need support in hospital we will 
help them to return home safely and as 
quickly as possible with the support they 
need.
 We will support people to live in high quality, 
sustainable environments. Working with 
partner organisations, we will create healthy 
and safer places to live by focusing on 
housing, planning and transport; accident 
reduction; how we respond to outbreaks and 
pandemics; and reducing domestic abuse. 
 We will work together with communities and 
partner organisations to design services that 
take account of the complexity of people’s 
lives and their overlapping health and social 
care needs.  We will focus on the best way to 
achieve good outcomes for people. 
Warwickshire’s communities and individuals are supported to be safe, healthy and independent
 14Warwickshire’s communities and individuals are supported to be safe, healthy and independent We will work closely with partner 
organisations to deliver intelligence-led 
initiatives such as fire prevention, preventing 
cyber crime and protecting vulnerable people 
from hate crime, radicalisation, and organised 
crime including county lines, exploitation, 
modern slavery and human trafficking.  
 Working within the Youth Justice Partnership, 
we will ensure that young people understand 
and take responsibility for their behaviour. We 
will identify and manage risks in the 
community and ensure the voices of victims 
are heard and responded to. By improving the 
quality of young people’s lives we will seek to 
ensure that they are diverted from the 
criminal justice system. Our priority is to reduce the fear of 
crime, and support communities and 
businesses to be safer and more resilient. Our 
emphasis is on protecting those in our 
community who most need our support, 
including vulnerable children and young 
people, elderly people and victims of domestic 
violence. 
 Our Fire and Rescue service will use data and 
information to understand all risks and how 
we manage them to deliver fire prevention, 
protection and response services. 
 We will develop our use of technology, for 
example real-time video footage, drones and 
GPS tracking systems at emergency incidents. 
 Our Fire and Rescue service will ensure 
increased efficiency and effectiveness 
through enhanced building inspections, 
improved diversity and recruitment, and 
robust contract management, ensuring best 
value for money.
 Our Trading Standards service will support 
businesses to achieve compliance and protect 
consumers. We will take strong action against 
rogue traders and provide information to help 
people avoid them.Work with communities to promote safety, prevent 
harm and reduce crime and disorder across 
Warwickshire
What this will mean for you:
You will live and work in buildings that are 
better protected from ﬁre through a 
well-informed and targeted inspection, 
prevention and intervention approach.
Your Fire and Rescue service will better 
reflect the diversity of the community you 
live in.  
Consistent and correct information and 
advice at the ﬁrst point of contact (will be 
available) for people requesting Fire and 
Rescue Safe and Well checks and other 
services.
You will be supported in understanding how 
to keep yourself, your family, your home and 
workplace safe.
You will see a decrease in youth crime, and 
young people will have the opportunity to 
take responsibility for their behaviour whilst 
being supported into constructive and 
positive lives.
As a consumer you will be protected and 
informed by your Trading Standards service.
15Support communities and businesses to develop 
the digital skills and tools they need in an 
increasingly digital economy
 We will invest in and support the digital 
skills of our communities, businesses and 
young people so that Warwickshire is in a 
strong position in an increasingly digital 
economy. 
 We will continue to support the 
development of vital computer 
programming skills in Warwickshire's 
primary and secondary schools to ensure 
that our young people have the necessary 
skills for the future. 
 We will ensure our libraries and one stop 
shop staff have the knowledge to support 
customers to access digital resources. Our 
front-line customer service centre will be 
able to support customers who choose to 
interact with us digitally. 
 By engaging with businesses we will better 
understand their digital skills needs and can 
work with training providers to shape future 
provision. We will also offer or signpost to 
digital skills guidance.
 We will continue to support the roll-out of a 
faster broadband service and 5G to all 
communities, which will support residents 
and businesses in both rural and urban 
areas.What this will mean for you:
You will have easy access to computers and new 
technology within our libraries and one stop 
shops.  
 Skilled staff will be available within libraries and 
one stop shops to support you to get the best out 
of technology. 
Skilled staff will be available within the customer 
service centre to support you to interact digitally. 
Our young people will have improved 
programming and digital skills and are better 
prepared for future work.
Businesses and residents have access to training 
opportunities and guidance around digital skills. 
You will be able to access technology and 
training to support you in gaining the digital 
skills and tools you need. 
You will have access to 5G whether you live in the 
countryside or town. 
Warwickshire’s economy is vibrant and supported by the right jobs, training, skills and infrastructure 16What this will mean for you:
There will be more businesses in the county, giving 
you more employment opportunities.
There will be more high quality jobs paying good 
salaries .
We will provide the support, space and tools that 
businesses need to grow and succeed in 
Warwickshire. 
You will have the skills you need to ﬁnd the work 
that you want within the county.
You will see a vibrant cultural offer across 
Warwickshire that is accessible and relevant to 
everyone. This will attract more visitors to the 
county, support economic growth and improve 
health and wellbeing.
 Our Fire and Rescue service will advise business 
owners on fire safety, and when required ensure 
that an emergency response is provided to 
protect life and minimise economic loss. 
  Through the implementation of our careers 
strategy and our Skills for Employment 
programme we will work with businesses and 
partners to enable and help young people move 
from education to employment. We will also help 
adults to gain new and different skills, so that 
they are able to meet the needs of a changing 
economy. This will ensure Warwickshire has a 
suitably equipped workforce.
 A new Heritage and Culture Strategy has been 
developed to ensure that Warwickshire continues 
to have a vibrant cultural offer. Through this we 
will enhance Warwickshire's reputation, 
expanding the county's heritage and culture 
sector and growing our visitor economy, with a 
strong focus on improving the health and 
wellbeing of our people. We will also maximise 
the benefits to Warwickshire of major events 
including Coventry City of Culture 2021 and the 
Commonwealth Games 2022. We will encourage, support and help 
our existing businesses to prosper and grow.
 We will attract new businesses to 
Warwickshire, focusing on those sectors 
where we have particular strengths, including 
automotive technology, advanced 
manufacturing, creative digital (such as 
gaming), and tourism. 
 To support this growth we will work with 
local planning authorities to bring forward a 
greater and more diverse supply of 
employment land that meets the needs of 
our growing economy. With government, we 
will shape and influence the new funding 
streams that will replace EU structural 
funding after EU exit.
 We will work with town centre business 
communities to adapt to changing consumer 
behaviours. In rural areas, we will support the 
development of tourism, and the local food 
and drink sectors.  Attract economic investment and maximise the 
rate of employment, business growth and skill 
levels in Warwickshire
Warwickshire’s economy is vibrant and supported by the right jobs, training, skills and infrastructure 17 Through increased home composting 
we will reduce the amount of waste we 
generate each year and improved waste  
collection will create a better environment for 
our communities across Warwickshire.
 We will increase recycling and composting at 
our household waste recycling centres, and 
work with our district and borough councils to 
improve kerbside collections, including for 
food waste. 
 We will focus on and influence the new 
National Waste Strategy to make sure we are 
align the way we deliver, develop and improve 
our vital waste management services. By 
doing this we will achieve cost savings and 
performance improvements. 
 In order to protect the environment and 
further reduce costs we will also limit the 
amount of waste that goes into landfill and 
maximise energy recovery.Increase reuse, recycling and composting rates 
and reduce waste across Warwickshire
What this will mean for you:
We will reduce the amount of your waste that 
needs to be disposed of in landﬁll. 
We will increase the reuse, composting and 
recycling rate by at least 1% each year to 
achieve an overall rate of 55% of all domestic 
waste by 2025.
We will provide a waste management service 
that is efﬁcient and effective, and fully 
supports the national strategy to reduce waste 
and improve reuse, composting and recycling.
Warwickshire’s economy is vibrant and supported by the right jobs, training, skills and infrastructure
 18 We will improve journey times and the 
dependability of our highway network. 
 We will develop prevention initiatives, based on 
evidence, to reduce road casualties in 
Warwickshire.
 We will continue to maintain our roads and 
footways to a good standard. We will use a 
data-led approach to identify assets in need of 
preventative maintenance in order to avoid the 
high costs associated with reactive 
maintenance.  By making sure our transport network 
is safe and well designed, with infrastructure 
that works together, we will encourage people 
to use forms of transport that are good for the 
environment and limit congestion levels 
across the county.
 Our focus will be on improving connectivity, 
especially for public transport users, cyclists 
and pedestrians, and on supporting economic 
growth by linking communities to important 
employment, leisure, health and education 
destinations.
 We will work with partner organisations  to 
tackle climate change and reduce carbon 
emissions by investing in public transport, 
walking and cycling infrastructures. We will 
support the use of electric vehicles and move 
Warwickshire towards sustainable transport 
choices.
 We will also deliver education and 
communications initiatives with a focus on 
road safety and reducing carbon emissions.Manage and maintain Warwickshire’s transport 
network in a safe, sustainable and integrated way
What this will mean for you:
A transport network that is ﬁt for purpose, in a good 
condition and safe for users.
It will be easier for you to make more sustainable 
journeys (cycling, walking, using public transport) by 
providing a better connected and more efﬁcient 
transport network and helping to reduce congestion.
An improved network allowing for the additional 
housing and population growth predicted for future 
years.  
Warwickshire’s economy is vibrant and supported by the right jobs, training, skills and infrastructure 19 Children and young people should have the 
best information and support to make 
successful progression into further education, 
higher education, apprenticeships and the 
world of work.  
 Students will have access to apprenticeships 
and we will be introducing T-levels – the new 
two-year courses that prepare students for 
work. 
 We will remove barriers to accessing high 
quality learning and raise education 
aspirations across the county, in particular for 
children in care and care leavers. We will do 
this by developing local solutions, which will 
also help to secure quality provision and 
positive outcomes for learners. 
 We will support parents by helping them 
provide language-rich learning at home. We 
will secure sufficient childcare and check that 
safeguarding arrangements are robust.Support and enable children and young people to 
access a place in a high quality education setting 
and achieve their full potential
 We will ensure there is full support for children 
with Special Educational Needs and Disability 
(SEND) and their families, and continue to 
increase the number of high quality places in 
special and mainstream schools for children 
with SEND. Wherever possible we will ensure 
specialist education provision is delivered closer 
to where people live. This means that not only 
will we improve attainment but we will also 
reduce the associated transport costs and 
inconvenience.
 For those children and young people who find 
conventional schooling difficult, we will support 
them to achieve their potential. 
 We will ensure that all children and young people 
benefit from sufficient high quality education 
provision in early years and school sectors. 
 We will also ensure that the right number of 
school places are available, the schools have 
robust safeguarding arrangements in place and 
that good practice is shared. 
What this will mean for you:
More of our 16 and 17 year olds will be in 
education, employment or training.
 
There will be more school places to meet growing 
demand in Warwickshire, including for learners 
with SEND.
 
All schools and settings in the more economically 
disadvantaged areas of Warwickshire will all be 
judged as good or outstanding.
 
There will be more supported routes into 
employment for our more vulnerable learners, with 
an increase in supported internships.
 
There will be better understanding of behaviours in 
schools, leading to a reduction in the number of 
ﬁxed-term exclusions for children in care and care 
leavers.
Warwickshire’s economy is vibrant and supported by the right jobs, training, skills and infrastructure
 20Put our resources in the right place to support the 
organisation’s priorities and balance the books 
Develop our workforce so that it has the right 
skills and capabilities to get the job done
Pursue leadership excellence and high 
performance at all levels
What this will mean for you:
You will experience trained, skilled and 
knowledgeable staff at the ﬁrst point of 
contact.
You will have a positive customer experience.
You will have opportunities to volunteer and 
make a difference within your community.
Your Council will reduce its carbon footprint 
and its impact on the environment.
Your feedback will influence and impact on 
improved service delivery.
You will continue to see a well-run and 
managed council that makes the best use of its 
resources.
Making the best use of resources
 To meet the changing needs and expectations 
of our customers and deliver the Council’s 
priorities in the most efficient way, we will invest 
in our workforce and find smarter ways of 
working. We will identify collaborative, modern 
and cost-effective work spaces, saving money 
and improving our offer to staff.
 We will develop our business intelligence, data 
and predictive analytics capability, systems and 
processes to help us to make decisions that 
improve outcomes and are fit for the future.
 We will deliver value for money for Warwickshire 
residents, make better and more strategic use of 
the Council’s assets and continue to improve the 
way in which we manage external contracts.
 We will design and deliver a carbon reduction 
programme across the Council to play our part 
in tackling climate change.
 We will work with communities to capitalise on 
individual and community strengths to develop 
new ways of doing things.
 We will optimise the investments we make into 
Warwickshire by developing a robust pipeline of 
projects and initiatives within the framework of 
our refreshed capital and commercial strategies.
 We will identify opportunities for the Fire and 
Rescue service to collaborate with other blue 
light services to enhance efficiency, 
effectiveness and public safety, through the 
most efficient use of assets such as fire 
stations, fire control and training facilities. 
21Reduce demand and reduce cost through 
innovative service design and focussed prevention 
interventions
 Prevention and intervention will underpin the 
overall approach that we take to public 
health, social care, health and communities 
in Warwickshire.
  Our focus will be on developing our 
communities’ strengths, resilience and 
cohesion by supporting the third sector, 
proactive volunteer groups and individuals 
to help people and protect infrastructure at 
times of pressure or emergency. 
  We will do this by developing an approach to 
prevention across Warwickshire, using 
valuable community resources, skills and 
strong prevention messages, to reduce 
demand and duplication of effort and 
improve results for communities.
  We will encourage the use of assistive 
technology and other solutions to support 
people’s wellbeing and reduce their need for 
social care. We will also increase our use of 
data analysis and Joint Strategic Needs 
Assessments  to design services that better 
fit residents’ needs.What this will mean for you:
You will have easily accessible online advice 
and guidance to enable self-help and resilience. 
 As customers you will have correct information 
and advice at the ﬁrst point of contact, 
signposting to other sources as appropriate.  
You will get the information you need at the ﬁrst 
point of contact, and the information you do 
receive will help you to stay healthy and live 
better lives. 
22
 Making the best use of resources Continuous improvement, simplifying and 
speeding up our processes will allow us to 
provide positive customer experiences. 
We will work with partner organisations to 
ensure people and communities receive 
the right information and advice first time.
 Through our new digital approach we will 
provide more convenient customer-facing 
services, including advice and simpler 
information, which will be supported by 
more personalised face-to-face customer 
contact for those who need it.
 We will encourage and build strong, 
resilient, self-supporting communities 
through the voluntary and community 
sector. We will develop a web directory of 
third, community and voluntary sector 
services that help build on individual and 
community strengths.
 We will increase the number of council 
services that are available online so that 
people and communities are able to 
access them conveniently and quickly.Make it easy for customers to access our 
information and services so they have a positive 
experience of our services
What this will mean for you:
You will have access to information 24/7, enabling 
you to support yourself.
You will be able to research community resources 
within your area.
You will be provided with consistent and accurate 
information no matter how you access services or 
contact the Council.
Self-assessment tools will be available for you to use 
at your convenience.
Where required you will have the help you need to 
access services.
Services will be available via digital technology, 
improving the effectiveness and efﬁciency of service 
delivery.
23 Making the best use of resources