Co-creating a climate  
action plan for a zero  
carbon city 2021-2040
Image: The Crown EstateCONTENTS
1. FOREWORD  3
2. SUMMARY 4
3. INTRODUCTION 5
4. EMISSIONS IN WESTMINSTER 7
5. DEVELOPING A 2040 CLIMATE EMERGENCY ACTION PLAN  
FOR WESTMINSTER 9
6. DRAFT RECOMMENDATIONS FOR ACTION – INVITING YOUR VIEWS  11
PEOPLE AND COMMUNITIES 11
ORGANISATIONS AND ECONOMY 15
BUILDINGS AND ENERGY  19
MOVEMENT AND PLACES 23
GLOSSARY 27
To have your say on our draft recommendations and  
to feed into the climate action plan, please submit your 
feedback, ideas and comments in our online survey at 
westminster.gov.uk/climate-change
For a printed version of the survey, please email 
climateemergency@westminster.gov.uk1. FOREWORD 
The pandemic has changed the world in fundamental ways; the one thing it has 
only made more urgent is the climate emergency. We have seen a glimpse of 
less polluted streets and cleaner air and we don’t want to go back. 
The council will lead by example and the steps we have taken in the past year have 
been significant. We now know the scale of the challenge and it is critical we address 
this: the City of Westminster generated approximately 2.2 million tonnes of CO2e in 
2017. This is the highest level of emissions per local authority in London.
We are already targeting emissions from our own buildings, having secured £13 
million funding to support the delivery of energy improvement measures, and 
have started discussions across the city about how best to target improvements 
in buildings, whether through redevelopment or retrofitting. This is why our new 
City Plan and Environmental Supplementary Planning Document will be critical in 
supporting more environmentally sustainable development outcomes.
The ambitious level of change required to meet our target of net zero carbon 
emissions by 2040 will affect almost every aspect of our daily lives.
But we cannot do this alone. It is vital that we work in partnership to tackle climate 
change and I encourage you all to get involved in shaping the city’s approach to 
tackling the climate emergency. I very much want us to create a climate emergency 
action plan together that fully reflects the priorities, aspirations and ideas of all those 
who live, work and study in the city we serve. 
This is a pivotal moment for Westminster to act decisively on climate change for the 
future of our city. I look forward to working with you all to realise this.
Cllr Rachael Robathan
Leader, Westminster City Council Emissions data includes all greenhouse gas emissions and not just 
carbon dioxide. ‘Carbon dioxide equivalent’ (CO2e) is a term for 
describing different greenhouse gases in a common unit. For any 
type and quantity of greenhouse gas, CO2e signifies the amount of 
carbon that would have an equivalent warming impact.2. SUMMARY
VISION
We will work in partnership with everyone who lives, works or studies in 
Westminster to achieve a net zero carbon city by 2040; a greener, cleaner and 
healthier Westminster, where residents, communities and businesses can thrive 
and are resilient to the impacts of climate change.
People and communities 
Residents, workers and visitors in Westminster actively 
adopt behaviours that reduce their carbon impact 
and communities work together as part of a city-wide 
partnership to tackle climate change.
Organisations and economy 
Westminster’s businesses take collective action to 
reduce their carbon emissions and help to shape a 
thriving, sustainable local economy. 
Buildings and energy 
New developments meet net zero carbon standards 
and emissions from existing buildings are significantly 
reduced. Westminster's energy supply comes from 
affordable, low carbon sources. 
Movement and places
Transport emissions and air pollution are minimised 
through sustainable and active travel. Our green 
streets and open spaces absorb carbon, build climate 
resilience and improve health and wellbeing.
3. INTRODUCTION
Burning fossil fuels and other human activities have caused greenhouse gases 
including carbon dioxide, methane and nitrous oxide to increase significantly 
in the atmosphere. This process causes the earth’s atmosphere to trap more 
heat, making the planet warmer, and is the main driver of climate change. Since the 
19th century, the Earth’s average global temperature has risen by 1° Celsius. 
The Paris Agreement is a legally binding international treaty on climate change. 
Its goal is to limit global warming to a maximum of 1.5° Celsius to avoid the most 
catastrophic impacts of climate change. To achieve this, global emissions must reach 
net zero by 2050.
Westminster City Council declared a climate emergency in September 2019 and 
committed to achieving net zero carbon emissions from council operations by 2030 
and across the city by 2040. 
Net Zero
Net zero is the balance between the emissions we produce and those we remove 
from the atmosphere through emission saving activities and offsetting. We 
achieve net zero when the amount of emissions we produce each year is equal 
to or less than the amount we take away. This can be achieved by reducing 
the emissions we produce and offsetting any remaining emissions that are too 
expensive or complex to prevent entirely.
from council sources
by 2030
by 2040carbon emissions Net zero
Net zero
carbon emissions 
city-wideThe impact of climate change
The impact of climate change will be felt both globally and locally. Rising global 
temperatures and sea levels will lead to more extreme local weather, including 
increased local flood risk and heatwaves, which will result in transport disruption, 
damage to buildings and infrastructure, higher food and fuel costs, and declining 
health – disproportionately affecting the most vulnerable . 
Local climate impacts
In London, as a dense city environment, we are more vulnerable to extreme heat, as 
well as surface water, river and tidal flood risk. These risks will increase with climate 
change. We need to develop a city that can cope with the challenges that climate 
change will bring – including more trees and vegetation to help provide shade 
and cool the local area and buildings that are designed to be cool in extreme heat. 
Buildings need to be less reliant on air conditioning, particularly hospitals and care 
homes, and resilient to the risk of future floods. 
One of the main levers for improvements to buildings is through the London Plan, 
the Mayor of London’s Spatial Development Strategy that sets out how London’s 
built environment can develop sustainably.
The benefits of climate action
 •Lower energy bills and improved health through building efficiency
 •Improved health and wellbeing from cleaner air, less congestion and more 
people walking and cycling 
 •Electric vehicles can offer substantial fuel savings
 •A more resilient city able to better withstand extreme events and future 
economic shocks
 •Improved public and green spaces, helping to enhance wildlife and wellbeing 
 •New jobs in green industries.
A green recovery
The Covid-19 pandemic has forced the world to reassess policy decisions, lifestyles 
and behaviour choices. We now face a huge economic and social recovery challenge, 
but this period serves as an indicator as to what can be achieved when ambitious 
and necessary decisions are taken. Government, businesses and local communities 
have been forced to coordinate and cooperate on an unprecedented scale. This has 
resulted in significant changes to the way we live and work, and associated impacts 
on the emissions we produce.
In April 2020, researchers observed that emissions decreased by 17% across the 
world compared to 2019 levels. Nearly half of these changes came about due to a 
reduction in transport activity. 
The pandemic has highlighted that the most vulnerable members of society 
disproportionately experience the biggest impacts in times of crisis. We therefore 
need to be prepared to protect the most vulnerable from the future impacts of 
climate change. 4. EMISSIONS IN WESTMINSTER
Westminster has some of the highest carbon emissions and worst air 
pollution in the UK, producing over two million tonnes (2,267 kilotonnes) 
of greenhouse gas emissions including carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous 
oxide and ozone in 2017, equivalent in weight to 146,000 Big Bens.
The vast majority (86%) of Westminster’s emissions are produced by buildings, with 
71% produced by non-domestic uses such as offices, shops, restaurants and public 
buildings and 15% from homes. The remaining emissions are produced by transport 
(11%) and other sources such as waste disposal and industrial processes (1.5%).
COUNCIL EMISSIONS
The council has set an ambitious target to become net zero by 2030. The direct 
actions the council is taking to cut emissions will form part of Westminster’s climate 
emergency action plan.
We generated almost 45,000 tonnes of carbon from our buildings and activities 
from April 2018 to March 2019. This is the first year that we have calculated our 
carbon footprint and will represent our baseline year that we will judge our future 
performance against. 
We need to reduce our baseline emiss-
ions by 8.3% per year (3,700 tonnes CO2e) 
to achieve our 2030 net zero target.
Our largest source of emissions (37.4%) is 
the Pimlico District Heating Undertaking 
(PDHU). 146,000
Big Bens =
emissions in 2017
37%
Institutional 
buildings and 
facilities
23%
Industrial buildings and facilities15%
Residential buildings11%
Commercial buildings
 and facilities11%
Road transport
Industrial processes
1.5%
Pimlico 
District Heating 
Undertaking
Housing communal suppliesCorporate assets
(ofﬁces, depots, 
libraries and 
street lighting)Leisure centresWaste and recycling vehiclesCouncil and Highways vehicles
2.1%
37.4%
33%13.7%7.3%6.6%PDHU overview
PDHU is the oldest district heating scheme in the UK and the largest in London. 
It was developed and built in the 1940s, using waste heat from Battersea Power 
Station to provide local heat and hot water for residents, distributed by a network of 
underground pipes. It currently supplies heat to over 3,200 households across three 
estates, 50 commercial customers and four schools. 
PDHU produced 17,000 tonnes of carbon in 2018/19; the largest single contribution 
to the council’s carbon footprint. We are currently exploring options to help upgrade 
and decarbonise the energy from PDHU as part of our climate emergency response. 
The role of the council
Whilst council emissions account for just 2% of emissions across the city, we are in a 
strong position to influence local and national policy, and facilitate action amongst 
business owners, landlords and communities across Westminster  . 
Successful delivery of Westminster’s climate emergency ambitions will depend upon 
strong and effective collaboration with partners across all areas of the city. We want 
to ensure we achieve this in a manner that is fully inclusive, where Westminster’s 
residents are at the heart of the approach and communities and small businesses are 
empowered to act on climate change. We want to consider the climate implications 
for all parts of society and take positive action to improve everyone’s lives.5. DEVELOPING A 2040 CLIMATE EMERGENCY 
ACTION PLAN FOR WESTMINSTER
The council commissioned Anthesis Environmental consultancy to identify 
where our city-wide emissions come from, including baseline data from 
which to measure our progress. Anthesis projected future emission levels 
for Westminster using a model called SCATTER to help understand the impact of 
different types and levels of carbon saving action. 
What is SCATTER?
SCATTER (Setting City Area Targets and Trajectories for Emissions Reduction) is a 
tool that helps local councils to standardise greenhouse gas reporting, align with 
international frameworks and set targets in line with the Paris Climate Agreement. 
It helps us to understand the actions we all need to take to achieve our target of net 
zero carbon emissions by 2040 based on an understanding of available interventions 
and technologies. 
To achieve net zero carbon emissions by 2040, the modelling proposed an ambitious 
programme of actions though which we can achieve an 84% reduction in emissions 
across Westminster, with the remaining emissions (16%) to be offset.
This recommendation requires a reduction rate of more than 82,000 tonnes of CO2e 
every year up to 2040.
2,000
1,800
1,600
1,400
1,200
1,000
400
200
0
2020
2030
2040
2050
2,200
Volume of carbon emissions (Kilotonnes of CO2e)
800
600
Business as usual emission reduction rate
High ambition emission reduction rate
Business as usual 
emission reductions account for 
changes implemented by the 
government, such as increasing 
energy supplied from renewable 
sources, and no speciﬁc local action. 
It offers us a 29% reduction by 2040.High ambition 
emission reductions will require 
us to ambitiously reduce emissions 
from every aspect of our lives 
including energy supply and 
demand, transport and waste. 
It offers an 84% reduction by 2040.Approach
Achieving net zero carbon emissions by 2040 requires ambitious action from 
everyone who lives or works in Westminster, alongside wider national support and 
interventions. It’s a huge challenge that requires long-term changes to almost every 
element of our lifestyles, decision making and behaviour. 
Credible
We want our approach to be credible and driven by the evidence of emissions we 
have begun to build a picture of. We will keep this under review, to monitor how well 
we are doing against Westminster’s annual emissions figures. 
In developing our action plan, we will align our approach with the Leader’s City for 
All vision and strategy. 
Sustainable
We will ensure our climate emergency programme is sustainable, offering health 
and wellbeing, economic and other wider co-benefits as well as protecting vulnerable 
people from the impact of climate change.
Innovative
We will also seek to be innovative, to embrace new technology to help tackle the 
climate emergency and continually review new technological solutions as and 
when they are developed, in line with our ‘smart city’ commitment to being a global 
centre of innovation.
Inclusive
Most importantly, Westminster’s climate emergency action plan will be inclusive - a 
joint plan, created by and delivered by everyone who lives and works in Westminster, 
reflecting local priorities, challenges and opportunities. We are inviting your input 
into meeting this target and identifying the type of actions we can take together, to 
help shape an ambitious action plan.
Co-creating a shared strategy and action plan
We will use your feedback on the draft recommendations and your priorities and 
ideas for action to create a climate emergency action plan. We will seek to build a 
collaborative approach to delivering and refining the shared plan in the lead up to 
2040, including targeted engagement and shared activities around specific actions, 
such as community projects and wider programmes as they take shape.
Please visit westminster.gov.uk/climate-change to share your feedback in our 
online survey. If you need a printed version of the survey or any other format, please 
email climateemergency@westminster.gov.uk.
Budget
The council has committed £5 million for key environmental projects to support its 
climate emergency response. This is in addition to external funding sources, including 
£13 million already secured from the Government’s Public Sector Decarbonisation 
Scheme to decarbonise council buildings. Additional capital funding, including 
Community Infrastructure Levy and carbon offset funds can also be drawn upon. 6. DRAFT RECOMMENDATIONS FOR ACTION – 
INVITING YOUR VIEWS
PEOPLE AND COMMUNITIES
We want to deliver a truly inclusive programme where 
communities are incorporated across all elements of 
the climate emergency, from shaping the action plan 
to behaviour change and rolling out local projects. 
We hope to gain your input so that a clear role for the 
community is incorporated into the action plan.
Vision
Residents, workers and visitors in Westminster actively adopt behaviours 
that reduce their carbon impact and communities work together as part  
of a city-wide partnership to tackle climate change.
Context and challenges
 •There are 125,001 homes in Westminster of which 
40% are rented, 31% are owned and 26% are 
socially rented. This includes 20,931 social housing 
properties of which 57% of residents are tenants 
and 43% are leaseholders (source: Census 2011). As 
most homes are not managed or owned by the 
council, community action is essential to meet net 
zero by 2040
20,931
57%social housing properties
tenants
43% leaseholders •The energy used in these homes accounts for 15% of the city’s emissions, higher 
than those from road transport. Just over half of all homes in Westminster have 
an energy performance certificate (EPC) rating of D or lower, with a further 31% 
being C-rated
 •Westminster’s social housing has high standards of heating and insulation 
and many council-owned properties have cavity wall insulation and/or double 
glazing. Retrofit programmes are underway although progress is limited by the 
conservation status of many of these areas
 •Nearly 50% of Westminster residents have bought energy from a green energy 
supplier and try to use less energy at home. London Power provide a competitively 
priced green tariff for London residents
 •The Carbon Offset Fund provides funding to local groups for low carbon energy 
schemes and home improvement schemes are available including Solar Together 
and EcoFurb
 •Westminster has one of the lowest recycling rates 
in the country at 22%, against a national average of 
around 43% across England, as well as producing 
354kg of waste per person, per year, higher than 
the average
 •Much of Westminster’s recycled waste is processed 
at a materials recovery facility in Southwark, with 
general waste handled at an energy recovery 
facility in Lewisham. This helps avoid sending any 
waste to landfill while also providing low-carbon 
heat for over 3,000 homes in Southwark. Other 
waste streams from within Westminster travel 
as far as 70 miles for disposal, although there are 
London-wide plans for all waste to be disposed of 
in London by 2026.
Funding for homes
 •The Mayor of London’s Warmer Homes Programme provides free heating, 
insulation and ventilation improvements for low-income Londoners who own 
their own homes or rent privately
 •Westminster’s Decent Homes grant funds up to £8,000 for low income homes to 
improve their energy efficiency.
22%
354kgrecycling rate 
waste per 
person per yearRecommendations
Recommendation Example actions
Raise awareness of climate change 
and promote behaviour that 
reduces emissions and delivers local 
sustainability benefits such as local 
shopping. Produce a series of ‘how to’ guides 
for community development towards 
net zero such as access to funding, 
resources, opportunities and support 
networks. 
Empower resident and community 
groups to craft their own proposals 
for reducing carbon emissions in 
their local area.Launch an interactive web page for 
residents to share projects, ideas, best 
practice and experiences.
Support residents to improve the 
energy efficiency of their homes and 
reduce energy use.Support and drive energy 
improvements in privately rented 
homes, focusing on the worst 
performing properties.
Encourage and empower tenants to 
report landlords of rental properties 
with poor energy efficiency 
performance.Work with private rented sector 
landlords to identify and improve 
properties with poor energy 
performance.
Promote local generation and use of 
affordable, clean energy.Share local community examples 
including action taking place in schools.
Increase take up of sustainable and 
active transport such as walking 
and cycling and reduce reliance on 
private vehicles.Encourage active transport through 
cycle support schemes and walking 
routes.
Support residents to reduce the 
amount of waste they produce and 
increase reuse and recycling.Support residents through information 
and communication campaigns.
Review the number of general 
waste collections to reduce waste, 
increase recycling rates and minimise 
emissions from collection services.Develop a new waste strategy.City-wide action
The council is:
Rolling out staff training and awareness raising across the council to help 
encourage positive behaviours that support our climate aims.
Working with schools to reduce travel emissions and air pollution around 
schools and provide extra space for school activities through the use of school 
streets and play streets.
Exploring how to improve the energy performance of council-owned  
housing. We have allocated £20 million of funding from the Housing Revenue 
Account, alongside additional external grant funding, to support  
initial improvements. 
 •Caulibox is a returnable lunchbox scheme which was trialled at Tachbrook 
Market in Pimlico. It’s also available to restaurants and customers who can 
register for reusable CauliBoxes and help to reduce the 11 billion pieces of 
packaging waste that are produced from food-on-the-go every year. Visit 
wearecauli.com to sign up
 •The Green Doctor programme offers free energy advice to vulnerable people to 
help them stay warm and save money. Visit westminster.gov.uk
 •Funding has been identified through the ECO 3 scheme, a government energy 
efficiency fund, to install insulation in 2,000 homes on the Lillington housing 
estate in addition to 4,000 properties that have already been fitted. The new 
insulation will save 600 tonnes of carbon each year
 •Residents who took part in our award-winning food waste recycling trial have 
saved 345 tonnes of food waste and plans are being developed to expand the 
food waste collection service to more areas of the city.ORGANISATIONS AND ECONOMY
Emissions from non-domestic buildings represent 
a high proportion of Westminster’s emissions and 
tackling energy consumption and fuel usage in this 
sector is a priority for the city. 
Vision
Westminster’s businesses take collective action 
to reduce their carbon emissions and help to 
shape a thriving, sustainable local economy. 
Context and challenges
 •Westminster is home to over 51,000 businesses from multinational headquarters 
to creative start-ups in shared work spaces. These businesses provide over 700,000 
jobs and contribute approximately 3% of the national Gross Domestic Product
 •Our built environment is an important part of what makes Westminster success-
ful. However, the energy required to heat and power our offices, shops and 
restaurants is a significant source of our emissions (71%) and we need the collective 
support of building owners, operators and users to address them
 •In 2020, the council hosted a series of workshops with businesses to explore the 
opportunities and challenges they face, which are reflected below and will feed into 
the strategy and action plan in more detail. The main challenges highlighted were: 
 •restrictions within the planning system preventing retrofitting
 •the installation of energy infrastructure, for example to charge  
electric vehicles
 •a lack of collaboration amongst partners across the city
 •a shortage of renewable energy sources and technology.
Historic Westminster
With over 11,000 listed buildings 
and structures in Westminster, 
56 conservation areas covering 
78% of Westminster’s footprint, 
and almost half (46%) of our 
housing built before 1900, the 
historic character and make-
up of Westminster presents a 
unique and sizeable challenge 
in tackling our main source of 
emissions.
There are many landowners and organisations across Westminster who are leading 
the way in taking positive action. The Great Estates and Business Improvement 
Districts are supportive of the green agenda and have developed comprehensive 
programmes to support local businesses to reduce their carbon emissions. We want 
to move the dial on engagement between our city-partners to tackle emissions 
from the built environment and champion a green economic recovery of the city.
Recommendations
Recommendation Example actions
Promote collaboration and provide 
support and information for 
organisations and landlords to 
improve the energy efficiency of 
the buildings they own, maintain or 
occupy, and reduce their energy use.Establish working groups, shared 
sources of information, best practice 
guides and funding resource guides 
to help businesses navigate and 
implement the necessary changes.
Run an information campaign to help 
tenants understand why action is 
needed.
Explore green clauses in lease terms.
Foster city-wide collaboration with 
organisations to tackle the climate 
emergency.
Build the capacity of organisations to 
understand, report and reduce the 
carbon emissions associated with 
their operations.Introduce standardised performance 
measurement and transparency 
requirements for commercial 
developments to report on operational 
energy performance beyond the five 
years stipulated in the new London 
Plan. 
Encourage greater accountability for 
emissions through a new Westminster 
Sustainable City Charter, a shared 
commitment for businesses to reduce 
carbon emissions.
Support small businesses to access 
finance and skills for projects that 
reduce their carbon impact, such as 
accessing and installing low carbon 
energy.Simplify and increase access to green 
finance.
Support the green agenda through our 
economic development and business 
support programmes.
Maximise emissions savings through 
purchasing sustainable goods and 
services and using local supply 
chains.Promote the low carbon agenda 
through our procurement approach 
and supply chains.Recommendation Example actions
Harness opportunities to stimulate 
a green economic recovery of the 
city, including low carbon skills and 
jobs, sustainable investment or clean 
technology.Community take-up of programmes 
such as Repowering London which offer 
youth skills and training opportunities.
Reduce emissions from freight, 
servicing and deliveries through 
fewer vehicle trips into and through 
the city and switching to electric 
vehicles.Launch our Freight, Servicing and 
Deliveries (FSD) Strategy and Action 
Plan and consider the feasibility of local 
distribution hubs for home deliveries 
across Westminster which utilise low-
carbon last-mile deliveries.
Support and incentivise 
organisations to reduce the amount 
of waste they produce, working in 
partnership to improve waste reuse 
and recycling, and maximise circular 
economy opportunities.Explore opportunities for waste 
consolidation schemes.
Create partnerships between 
businesses and academics to explore 
opportunities in the circular economy.
Organisations and local waste 
management companies work 
together to reduce the carbon 
impact of their waste collection 
services.Extend waste collection consolidation 
activity such as The Crown Estate’s 
Regent Street programme.
City-wide action
The council is:
Reducing the impact of outsourced services and encouraging suppliers to 
reduce their environmental impact through the development of a responsible 
procurement strategy.
Exploring new routes of funding to support our climate emergency response 
and reduce the carbon impact of our investments through implementing a 
green investment strategy. •The Crown Estate’s innovative Food Waste Pledge supports restaurants on Regent 
Street and St James’s to tackle food waste. Twelve restaurants are signed up to 
achieve a 25% reduction in food waste through changes to the menu, removing 
sources of waste such as bread baskets and creating dishes that use leftover food. 
Find out more at regentstreetonline.com/insider/food-waste-pledge
 •Their Regent Street consolidation scheme uses a single electric lorry to collect all 
customer packages from a consolidation warehouse and deliver them to retail 
outlets on Regent Street, reducing HGVs by an impressive 94%
 •Zero Carbon Westminster is Westminster Property Association’s white paper 
which calls on property owners, developers and investors to commit to action 
to remove carbon emissions from the built environment. It brings together 
businesses and policymakers to help the industry make the ambitious changes 
required to achieve net zero carbon emissions by 2040
 •Grosvenor refurbished a listed Georgian property on Ebury Street to achieve 
a BREEAM ‘Outstanding’ rating – the UK’s first BREEAM Outstanding listed 
building. The conversion of the former hotel into apartments incorporated 
ventilation with heat recovery, rainwater harvesting, solid wall insulation, vacuum 
glazing and solar thermal energy
 •Somerset House aims to be a best-practice arts and cultural centre with a focus 
on environmental sustainability. The organisation has invested in a Combined 
Cooling, Heat and Power plant, installed roof insulation, replaced lights with low 
energy LED bulbs and installed natural ventilation
 •Westminster Wheels offers young people free training in cycle mechanics and 
a six-month placement learning how to refurbish unwanted bikes for Westminster 
residents.Image: The Crown EstateBUILDINGS AND ENERGY 
Vision
New developments meet net zero carbon 
standards and emissions from existing 
buildings are significantly reduced. 
Westminster's energy supply comes  
from affordable, low carbon sources. 
Context and challenges
 •Buildings account for 86% of Westminster’s emissions. This includes operational 
emissions produced either within the building during use (direct) or emissions 
associated with the grid-supplied electricity (indirect). Embodied emissions 
related to the construction, refurbishment and demolition of the building are not 
yet included, but we will explore opportunities to incorporate and address these 
emissions in future updates to the action plan
 •Westminster has a lower capacity for renewable energy technology than other 
London boroughs, with an installed capacity per unit area rating under 50% of the 
average value. However, the density of energy use makes it a favourable location 
for the development of more low carbon heat networks such as the Pimlico District 
Heat Undertaking and this is reflected in recent plans including the Decentralised 
Energy Masterplan and City Plan 2040
 •Waste heat from the tube and locally linked high-energy using sites provide 
significant opportunities to access otherwise wasted energy
Image: The Crown Estate •Large scale retrofitting and the installation of renewable technologies such as 
solar energy is made significantly more difficult by the high number of listed 
buildings and conservation area status of much of Westminster
 •Significant funding will be required to make the necessary changes, which also 
depend on the availability of new renewable technologies such as combined heat 
and power systems
 •The draft City Plan 2040 states that major developments should achieve net 
zero carbon with a proportion of this to be achieved through on-site efficiency 
improvements, and developments should demonstrate how local carbon 
reduction targets will be achieved. Any shortfall in carbon reduction targets must 
be met off-site or via a locally managed carbon offset payment
 •The council’s draft Environmental Supplementary Planning Document (ESPD) 
provides further detail and guidance on the City Plan’s environmental policies to 
drive emission reductions in the built environment
 •Our new Code of Construction Practice sets the standards that developers must 
meet when undertaking major projects to assist with managing environmental 
impacts
 •The Community Infrastructure Levy is a charge that can be applied by local 
authorities on new developments to support developments in local infrastructure, 
including renewable supply
 •Gas boilers will be banned in new homes from 2025 under the Future Homes 
Standard, and homes will need to achieve a 75-80% reduction in carbon emissions 
compared to homes built to current standards.Recommendations
Recommendation Example actions
Support improvements to energy 
efficiency in buildings and increase 
the use of renewable energy.Review planning policy to retrofitting 
historic buildings. 
Collaborate with other councils around 
consistent planning laws and guidance.
Retrofit buildings across 
Westminster to improve their energy 
performance and increase renewable 
energy sources. Encourage the sensitive retrofit of 
historic buildings, where possible.
Explore funding to decarbonise the 
Pimlico District Heating Undertaking 
(PDHU)
Ensure that new developments 
minimise their whole life carbon 
impact, reduce emissions on site as 
far as possible in line with industry 
best practice standards, and rely less 
on carbon offsetting.Set out higher environmental standards 
for development in Westminster 
through our City Plan and new 
Environmental Supplementary 
Planning Guidance.
Support landlords and homeowners 
to improve minimum energy 
efficiency standards, prioritising 
improvements to those with the 
lowest energy performance ratings.Ensure landlords and homeowners 
have access to a holistic retrofit advice 
service like London Councils’ Ecofurb 
programme, or a similar model.
Maximise the generation, distribution 
and use of renewable and low carbon 
energy across the city such as district 
heat networks and biogas.Expand existing district heat networks 
and require new developments to 
link up to heat networks within future 
planning policies.
Improve energy efficiency in 
council buildings and housing stock 
and ensure that energy is 100% 
renewable.Carry out of major retrofit of the 
Council’s own social housing estates, 
targeting an average of EPC Band B.City-wide action
The council is:
Decarbonising the Pimlico District Heating Undertaking. The council is 
investigating options to improve the efficiency and reduce the carbon impact 
of PDHU. Potential opportunities include: generating low carbon heat using 
heat pump technology, making use of waste heat from the Underground and 
improving heat controls in PDHU-supplied homes.
Improving the energy performance of council buildings and assets. The 
council has secured £13 million through the government’s Public Sector 
Decarbonisation Scheme to decarbonise up to 45 of our own operational 
buildings. Council offices, depots and community hubs (including libraries  
and leisure centres) will all benefit from retrospective energy improvements, 
like low-carbon heating, insulation, LED lighting and solar panels. 
Ensuring new buildings achieve low carbon standards. The council’s new City 
Plan (adopted in 2021) and emerging Environmental Supplementary Planning 
Guidance will help drive forward sustainable building standards in new 
developments to ensure new buildings support the city’s net zero aspirations.
 •Ebury Bridge will deliver 781 new homes producing 90% less carbon in use than 
the current buildings. The homes will be heated and cooled using ground source 
heat pumps and the new neighbourhood will have 'paid back' the carbon cost of 
the build just twelve years after completion. Visit eburybridge.org
 •Schools are tackling air pollution with help from the council’s School Clean Air 
Fund  which offers £1 million to help primary schools implement clean air measures
 •Repowering London helps communities to develop cheap and clean energy 
through energy co-operatives. Community funds ensure that any profits are 
used locally to install energy efficient measures for vulnerable people, train local 
volunteers or support youth training. The London Community Energy Fund is 
funding feasibility studies for solar panels on The Stowe Centre and Westminster 
Academy on Harrow Road and Repowering London is working with Paddington 
Development Trust to develop a business model. Find out more at repowering.
org.uk/renewable-energy.MOVEMENT AND PLACES
Road transport represents 11% of Westminster’s 
emissions, but compared to emissions from the 
built environment this is lower than the average 
local authority.
Green spaces and the natural environment have a 
significant role in removing carbon emissions from 
the atmosphere through trees and other natural 
features. Improvements to the city’s green spaces 
also offer the benefit of improving biodiversity, air 
quality and enhancing wellbeing.
Vision
Transport emissions and air pollution are minimised through sustainable 
and active travel. Our green streets and open spaces absorb carbon, build 
climate resilience and improve health and wellbeing.
Context and challenges
 •The arrival of the Elizabeth Line in 2022 and the redevelopment of Victoria Coach 
Station provide opportunities to reduce congestion and increase the use of active 
travel and public transport instead of private vehicles. As COVID-19 lockdown 
restrictions were lifted, the council introduced 11km of additional cycle routes and 
800 temporary cycle spaces, complementing existing networks
 •In October 2021, Westminster will become part of the Ultra Low Emission Zone 
(ULEZ), requiring minimum emission standards Euro IV (Petrol) and Euro VI 
(Diesel) for cars and vans, and Euro VI for larger vehicles
 •There are over 1,000 electric vehicle charging points across Westminster, the 
highest rate per capita of any UK local authority. Westminster also recorded the 
second highest number of Ultra Low Emission Vehicle (ULEV) registrations in 2020. 
Parking surcharges for diesel vehicles and resident permit discounts incentivise 
the transition to ULEVs
 •Westminster car club providers have committed to make their whole fleet electric 
by 2025
 •Westminster is home to some of the UK’s most famous parks, owned and 
managed by the Royal Parks. The council manages around 200 smaller parks and 
open spaces and the average distance to the nearest open space is just under 
300m. There are approximately 20,000 trees in Westminster and up to 200 new 
trees are being planted every year
 •The council’s Air Quality Action Plan sets out how we will tackle air pollution
 •Our strategy for open spaces and biodiversity details a partnership approach to 
protecting and enhancing the city’s green spaces
 •The Westminster Walking Plan, Cycling Strategy, and the emerging Movement 
Strategy support increased active travel
 •The council’s Freight, Servicing and Deliveries (FSD): Strategy & Action Plan 
2020-2040  aims to achieve reductions in freight vehicle numbers and emissions
 •Trees in Westminster provide a net carbon storage of around 1,045 tonnes of 
carbon per year
 •London has more than 40% of the UK's green walls and roofs
 •Existing tree canopy cover for Westminster was 16.17% in 2018
 •To achieve 30% tree canopy cover, 15,528 more trees 
need to be planted offering an additional cumulative 
total of 194 tonnes of carbon removed up to 2030.
1,045Westminster 
trees store
tonnes of 
carbon per 
yearRecommendations
Recommendation Example actions
Encourage sustainable and active 
travel through the creation of traffic 
free zones, supporting walking or 
cycling infrastructure and facilities 
(e.g. cycle storage).Support safer, healthier and greener 
travel across the city through the 
Council’s Movement Strategy.
Increase the use of electric vehicles 
through more charging points and 
stakeholder partnership working to 
promote a shift to electric public and 
private vehicles.Continue to expand electric vehicle 
charging points beyond the 1,000 
already installed across the city.
Reduce Westminster’s contribution to 
transport emissions outside the city, 
including through reduced air travel.Discourage business air travel.
Develop and promote a local 
approach that enables Westminster’s 
organisations and communities to 
offset their carbon impact and retain 
project benefits within the city.Facilitate better access to finance, such 
as the Carbon Offset Fund.
Maintain existing tree coverage and 
look for opportunities to further 
‘green’ the city.Commit to the protection and 
improvement of open spaces.
Promote nature-based projects to 
support local carbon saving activity.
Understand the potential impacts  
of climate change to Westminster 
and take action to improve local 
climate resilience and protect 
vulnerable people, livelihoods, 
businesses and services.Assess future climate risk to the city 
and ensure new infrastructure is 
designed with the long-term impacts of 
climate change in mind.City-wide action
The council is:
Reducing the impact of council transport and travel by converting our vehicle 
fleets to electric vehicles, including two refurbished waste vehicles that were 
converted from diesel to electric.
Consolidating commercial waste collections to help reduce emissions from 
waste vehicles across the city.
Piloting a new highways maintenance model in partnership with our  
highway contractor FM Conway. Our low carbon street works pilot on King 
Street in 2020 cut carbon emissions by 75% in comparison to a standard 
maintenance scheme. This was achieved by using electric tools, recycled 
and lower carbon materials, and low carbon fuels and vehicles. The council 
will be piloting the low carbon delivery model across several more planned 
maintenance schemes in 2021/22. 
Delivering over 1,000 on-street electric vehicle charge points across the city,  
the highest of any local authority. We are aiming to increase this to 1,500  
charge points by April 2022.
 •The Oxford Street District framework launched in February 2021 to pilot low-
carbon economic growth and development. The council has committed £150 
million to kickstart the programme and work will begin immediately on interim 
improvements including additional pedestrian space, pop up parks and greening 
projects to pioneer our response to the climate emergency. In partnership with 
local and London-wide partners and businesses, the area will create a zero carbon 
built environment, zero-emission road transport and resilient communities. Find 
out more at osd.london/framework
 •Wild West End is a partnership between West End property owners to improve 
biodiversity in central London and create green spaces for residents, visitors and 
workers to enjoy. Green roofs, planters, green walls, flower boxes, street trees and 
open spaces offer a habitat for declining bird species as well as bees, bats and 
butterflies. Wild West End is endorsed by London Wildlife Trust and the Greater 
London Authority and supported by Arup. Visit wildwestend.london
 •Free cycling training is available to anyone who lives, works or studies in 
Westminster.
To have your say on our draft recommendations and  
to feed into the climate action plan, please submit your 
feedback, ideas and comments in our online survey at 
westminster.gov.uk/climate-change
For a printed version of the survey, please email 
climateemergency@westminster.gov.ukGLOSSARY
Carbon offsetting
Carbon offsetting means investing in projects and activities that save carbon to help 
compensate for carbon emissions that cannot be avoided elsewhere. These projects 
are usually designed to absorb extra carbon, such as through tree planting, or to help 
reduce future emissions, such as renewable energy technology. They can also deliver 
wider community benefits such as employment, biodiversity and improvements to 
health and wellbeing. 
Offsetting will be part of the solution to help Westminster achieve our net zero target; 
however, the priority is always to reduce carbon emissions as much as possible first, 
before looking to offset any remaining emissions. 
Circular economy
A circular economy designs-out consumer waste and pollution by keeping products 
and materials in use rather than being thrown away. It involves sharing, leasing, 
reusing, repairing, refurbishing and recycling existing materials and products as 
long as possible to reduce waste to a minimum. 
Climate resilience
Climate resilience is preparing for hazardous events related to climate change. It 
involves assessing how climate change will create new risks such as flooding and 
making changes so that we can better cope with them. It focuses on those who will 
be most affected by the impact of climate change such those who may be unable 
to afford rising energy costs or cope with extreme temperatures.
Embodied carbon
Embodied carbon is the carbon footprint of a material, product or building, 
including emissions associated with its creation (the extraction of raw materials), 
transportation, construction and use (operation).
Net zero
Net zero is the balance between the emissions we produce and those we remove 
from the atmosphere through emission saving activities and offsetting. We achieve 
net zero when the amount of emissions we produce each year is equal to or less 
than the amount we take away. This can be achieved by reducing the emissions we 
produce and offsetting any remaining emissions that are too expensive or complex 
to prevent entirely.
Retrofitting
Installing energy efficient measures, such as insulation, double glazing and 
efficient electrical and heating appliances, in existing buildings to improve their 
environmental performance and reduce the loss of heat and energy.
Whole life carbon
Whole life carbon relates to the emissions associated with a building or product 
across its entire lifespan, including its creation, emissions associated with its day-to-
day use and emissions related to its eventual disposal. For buildings, this includes 
emissions from lighting, heating and appliances as well as the embodied emissions 
associated with its construction, maintenance and disposal. 