Actions to meet the climate crisis with 
inclusivity, prosperity and fairness2
Contents
This needs all of us: a call to action
Navigating the action plan
     More action, faster
     Why we need to change
     What has the region committed to?
     Emissions explained
We need to make the journey to 2041 without leaving anyone behind
We need to boost our resilience to locked-in climate breakdown
We need to reconcile our past with our future
We need to build more places, and more connectivity within places
We need to save energy and resources without affecting shared prosperity
The UK context
Links to the Local Industrial Strategy
Fellow travellers
Doing things the West Midlands way
Actions
     We will change our economy without leaving anyone behind
     We will invest in the resilience of our places
     We will use our industrial past to create a new future
     We will create places and connections that help us to meet the climate challenge
     We will decouple prosperity from the consumption of energy and resources
Next steps: write our story
Appendix 1: existing policies and asks1
3
7
8
9
10
11
12
12
13
14
18
44
451
This needs all of us: a call to 
action
Human beings learn through storytelling. There 
are some stories about the West Midlands that we 
know well, and share with pride. We changed the 
world through vision, innovation, and industry. We 
remade places by using strong local government. 
We became a region of work, trade, and play, 
connected in thousands of ways to the world.
Now, we are writing a new volume of the West 
Midlands story, with new authors, in a new time 
– but we need these familiar themes to carry 
through. Once again, we are marshalling our 
talents and capacity for innovation to meet a 
global challenge. Local government leadership of 
place matters more than ever, and we are going 
to use that leadership to build a movement, from 
where we are, to where we would like to be. Our 
strengths in engineering combined with technical 
innovation will give us an edge that we can sell 
across the planet. Indeed, we are connected to the 
world in ways that Boulton and Watt could never 
have imagined, and we will use those connections 
to share, learn and trade. 
The framework outlined in this paper is the 
storyboard: it outlines why we need to address 
climate breakdown and to adapt to climate 
change the opportunity it provides to create 
a highly productive, low carbon economy; it 
reflects on what we might need to do (and when 
we need to do it) it suggests who needs to take 
a lead, and how it must be done if we are do it in a way which is thoughtful and inclusive. It also 
suggests – based on the estimates in the July 2019 
carbon budget – that an investment programme 
substantial enough to meet this challenge will be 
in the order of £40bn over 21 years (2020-2041).
The actions we propose are things that individuals, 
communities, businesses and government at all 
levels can lead. They include:
1. Active travel and cleaner transport, including 
keep your car at home schemes to reduce 
emissions, reduce unnecessary travel and 
encourage low carbon connectivity. We will 
also be working with the 5G Team to support 
infrastructure for digital connectivity to 
reduce the need to travel. 
2. Infrastructure to support the transition to 
electric charging at in the region and to 
put our region at the forefront of change 
in one of its anchor sectors. This would 
be complemented by the UK Battery 
Industrialisation Centre and ongoing 
discussions about creating the UK’s first 
Gigafactory in the region.  
3. Transition to more eco-friendly homes, 
proposing the development of a West 
Midlands ‘new green deal’ that learns from 
history and leverages devolution. Our 
proposed actions on this focus on both the 
financing of retrofit, as well the introduction 
Councillor Ian Courts
Portfolio holder for Environment, Energy 
& HS22
of a zero carbon standard for new builds.
4. Creating breathable places, including big 
ambitions for tree planting programme with 
one tree for each resident, as well as building 
on Wildlife Ways and advancing plans to 
establish a West Midlands ‘national park’.
5. A number of behaviour change campaigns at-
scale, including on single-use plastics, energy 
use, waste and cycling, walking and active 
travel. The WMCA has already committed 
to eliminating single-use plastics from all 
activities by 2020, and we will work to see 
how other organisations and individuals across 
the region can make similar commitments.
6. Investment to support re-skilling and 
employment as a result of sector transitions 
– including further work to scope a climate 
re-skilling workstream over time. An example 
of this is encouraging FE colleges, universities 
and other training providers to incentivise 
transition into careers linked with climate 
adaptation and the natural environment. 
7. Incentives for business, including ‘clean 
growth challenges’ which boost the R&D 
capacity and pace of technological innovation 
of the region in support of its Industrial 
Strategy. 
8. Commitments we can make as ‘anchor 
institutions’ (within the public sector) to use 
our size, scale, procurement practice and 
employers’ policies. One area we are keen 
to explore is securing the means to help all 
places in the region to shift to LED street 
lighting.  
9. Consideration of new fiscal mechanisms – 
such as workplace levies, carbon accounting 
and Green Bonds – to incentivise clean growth 
and make the devolution case to Government.  
10. Pursuing energy devolution so that we can 
combine a shift to sustainable energy with a 
medium-term reduction in fuel poverty. We 
will work closely with Energy Capital around 
the need for devolution of resources and 
responsibilities to support this, for example 
securing devolution of Energy Company 
Obligation funding to the WMCA.These are just some of the actions that will 
be needed to make a success of a society and 
system-wide change in the way we live, connect 
and work. But we are not starting from scratch: 
from our efforts to secure creating the UK’s first 
Gigafactory in the region, and our commitment 
to driving investment into charging infrastructure 
for electric vehicles, through to our community-
level Better Streets funds and pledge to eliminate 
single-use plastics (some of these existing 
commitments can be found in Appendix 1). 
Likewise, local authority and community partners 
have already taken many steps on the journey to a 
climate-resilient society. 
Nonetheless, there is a huge amount to do, and 
we understand the scale of the change required. 
We know that this is a load that needs to be 
shared, from people in their communities, to 
public services and our business community. It 
is in partnership that we will come up with the 
solutions that will best serve our region. So please: 
think about the challenges, the proposals to 
address them, and join us in writing a story that 
future generations will live. 3
1. These ideas are not set in stone: the WMCA 
Climate Action Plan is a green paper. It is 
making a set of proposals, and using those 
as a basis for iteration and dialogue. Indeed, 
it is impossible to embark on changes of this 
magnitude without that dialogue. Some of 
the proposals will be existing policies and 
investments, but most of them will be ideas 
that the region will need to develop. If you 
want more, or something different, now is the 
time to ask for it.
2. WMCA is not leading everything: this is an 
attempt to outline what is required, at what 
level, and by when. It is an exercise in trying 
to lay out a collective challenge for the people 
and places of this region. The Mayoral WMCA 
is answerable to local people and the local 
authorities that comprise it, and a great deal 
of the sub-national legwork will be led by 
neighbourhoods, towns, and cities. Central 
Government also has an important part to 
play: whether it is in regulation, devolving its 
power, or investing money. As such, this plan 
will try to identify what is necessary and ‘who 
leads’.
3. Pace matters: in averting climate breakdown, 
the rule of thumb is “the earlier the better”. 
It is why WMCA Board plans to reach zero 
carbon 21 years into its 80 year carbon budget 
– the more we can do, the less climate change 
we lock in (and therefore have to adapt to). As 
such, the paper will estimate timescales for 
the suggested actions: 
 -those which will need to done within five 
years, 
 -those which will need to be need to be 
done between five and fifteen years,
 -those which will need to be done in the 
final five years leading up to 2041. 4. Find yourself, your place, and your 
organisation: everyone will have a role to 
play in getting this region to become zero 
carbon by 2041. Anyone who reads this plan 
should be able to see where their home, 
neighbourhood, town, city or place of work 
fits. If that isn’t clear – get in touch.
More action, faster
Why we need to change
Summer 2019 saw two significant events in the 
West Midlands. In June, at the WMCA Annual 
General Meeting, the Board declared a climate 
emergency – inspired by the Youth Strike 4 
Climate movement, who told the Board that they 
expected more from the region’s leadership. 
In July, the WMCA Board passed an 80-year 
carbon budget1, which estimates the maximum 
carbon that can be emitted by the region whilst 
delivering on our obligations under the Paris 
Agreement. The Board also agreed that an 
estimated investment of 1-2 percent of regional 
GVA was required to ensure that it was possible 
to meet that budget. Between 2020 and 2041, 
this works out at about £40bn: an investment 
programme over five times larger than the one 
WMCA and its partners is currently delivering. 
Without that investment, regional emissions will 
lock in between 3-4 degrees of warming – and the 
likelihood of reaching zero carbon at all by 2100 
sharply diminishes.
Public Private Partnership
It is clear that we cannot create this money via 
prudential borrowing and taxation alone, even if 
that were supported by local people. Government 
must support the region through devolution, 
regulation and investment, and we need to work 
in partnership with businesses and third party 
organisations to stimulate the creation and use 
of innovative financial products, from community 
share issues to green bonds. Navigating the action plan
1. WMCA area comprising of the geography of the Black Country, Coventry and Warwickshire, and Greater Birmingham and Solihull Local 
Enterprise Partnerships. This made up of the unitary and district councils of Walsall, Wolverhampton, Sandwell, Dudley, Birmingham, Solihull, 
Cannock Chase, East Staffordshire, Lichfield, Wyre Forest, Bromsgrove, Redditch, Tamworth, Coventry, North Warwickshire, Nuneaton and 
Bedworth, Rugby, Stratford Upon Avon and Warwick. See: https:/ /governance.wmca.org.uk/documents/s3219/Appendix.pdf4
It is also clear that achieving our climate goals 
will require an unprecedented reduction in 
emissions, which is why WMCA has set a 
realistic timeframe for its zero carbon target, for 
2041. Previous reductions have been possible 
because of a number of factors, which we either 
cannot or will not replicate. Firstly, because 
of EU directives2 mandating the closure of 
coal-fired power stations, and national scale 
installation of renewables. Large reductions 
in industrial emissions have also been caused 
by local deindustrialisation, but consumption 
has not declined at the same rate – suggesting 
we are just ‘offshoring’ our emissions to other 
countries. Finally, we need to understand that 
people living in poverty tend to contribute to 
emissions reductions. Our commitment to lifting 
people out of poverty remains implacable, but the 
consequences of doing so may well be increased 
emissions unless we change how we do this. Some WMCA local authority partners have 
agreed to reach net zero carbon – either for their 
operations or the whole area – by 2030. This level 
of ambition is something that WMCA supports, 
and will strongly back any local authority partner 
that signs up to an earlier target – but in setting 
the regional target, we take into account that 
what we are aiming to do is unprecedented in this 
country, will require collaboration at all levels, 
and will require building the regional capacity 
to deliver and hold partners accountable, which 
takes time.
2.  Initially, the Large Combustion Plant Directive (2001/80/EC), followed by the Industrial Emissions Directive (2010/75/EU).Industry and Commercial 
Electricity
13%
Industry and Commercial 
Gas
10%
Large Industrial Installations
10%
Industrial and Commercial Other Fuels
4%
Agriculture
0%Domestic Electricity
9%
Domestic Gas
19%
Domestic ‘Other Fuels’
11%Road Transport (A Roads)
12%Road Transport (Motorways)
11%Road Transport (Minor Roads)
14%Diesel Railways
1%Transport (Other)
1%2016 CO2 Emissions (21 MtCO2 ) for WMCA area
Figure 1 – WMCA emissions in 2016: like most areas there is a relatively even split between 
commercial/industrial, domestic and transport sectoral emissions.
Staying within a cumulative carbon dioxide emissions budget of 126 million tonnes (MtCO2) for the 
period of 2020 to 2100.
A West Midlands target of net-zero emissions no later than 2041, with interim targets based on a 2018 
baseline of 36% reduction by 2022, and 69% reduction by 2027, supported by the corresponding 
carbon budgets was set.What has the region committed to?
The carbon budget committed the region to the following:5
By using a similar approach to the Tyndall Centre for Climate Change, we can infer the estimated 2020 
– 2100 carbon budgets for all of the local authorities in the WMCA 3-LEP area:
0.00 5.00 10.00 15.00 20.00 25.00 30.00 35.00Tamworth
Redditch
Cannock Chase
Bromsgrove
Wyre Forest
Nuneaton & Bedworth
North Warwickshire
Lich/f_ield
Rugby
Warwick
East Staﬀordshire
Stratford-Upon-Avon
Walsall
Wolverhampton
Solihull
Dudley
Coventry
Sandwell
Birmingham2.10
2.48
2.75
2.99
3.07
3.49
3.53
4.20
4.57
5.15
5.33
5.49
7.31
7.40
7.61
8.49
9.58
9.65
30.81WMCA (3-LEP) 2020 - 2100 Carbon Budgets
Figure 2 – The 2020-2100 carbon budgets for each local authority in the WMCA 3-LEP area, expressed 
in MtCO2 – these are estimated in order to frame action, and are not binding on the authorities listed 
above.
So, what does this mean? Firstly, let’s look at 2016 emissions on a per person basis, in each of the local 
authorities in the WMCA area: 
0.00 2.00 4.00 6.00 8.00 10.00Walsall
Tamworth
Dudley
Birmingham
Coventry
Wolverhampton
Nuneaton & Bedworth
Redditch
Cannock Chase
Sandwell
Wyre Forest
Bromsgrove
Solihull
Warwick
Lich/f_ield
Rugby
East Staﬀordshire
Stratford-Upon-Avon
North WarwickshireEmissions per capita (2016)
Figure 3 – Emissions (in tonnes) per capita for the year 2016, for each local authority in the WMCA 
3-LEP area.6
By looking at differences across the diverse places of the West Midlands, the following can be inferred:
• Density makes a difference: in cities / conurbations, people, energy, and items have less far 
to travel, and economies of scale are easier to realise. Furthermore, some homes in rural areas 
have less amenity to enable different choices: e.g. poorer public transport, or homes that are not 
connected to a gas main.
• People living in poverty are already low carbon: they are less likely to own a car, and generally 
consume less – e.g. by rationing heating to pay for food. As such, areas with significant poverty 
in the region tend to have lower per capita emissions – and emission drops in these areas can be 
partly attributed to rising poverty.
Understanding these differences will help us to come up with the right policies and investments for the 
many different places of the West Midlands. 
Emissions explained
4.55.37
A small family living in a Victorian mid-
terrace, with one parent at home emits 4.5 
tonnes of CO2.A typical family car would emit 5.37 
tonnes of CO2 if it drove around the 
circumference of the earth.
Balancing the region’s carbon budget, and becoming zero carbon en route, will be a huge challenge to 
the West Midlands. If we carry on emitting carbon dioxide at 2016 levels, we will ‘spend’ 80 years of 
emissions in just six years. 
Carbon budgeting for big investments will help us to ensure that they stack up: but this carbon budget 
is not the only challenge, and it is important to not see it as the only motivator for change. 7
1
We need to make the journey 
to 2041 without leaving anyone 
behind
By 2041, the West Midlands economy needs to shift to one which is 
zero carbon and abides by circular economy principles, while enabling 
the people of the region to build and enjoy their prosperity. That is not 
where we are at the beginning of 2020. The choices we make now will 
determine whether the region can deliver on its obligations, and the 
extent to which we can do so in a way which alleviates poverty, deeper 
inequality, and disenfranchisement.8
2
We need to boost our 
resilience to ‘locked in’ climate 
breakdown
Some changes to the climate are inevitable – either because they have 
already happened, or will already happen. This means that the people, 
places and infrastructure that comprise the West Midlands will need 
investment in order to withstand impacts like increased rainfall and 
extreme temperatures. This will require us to think differently about 
nature-based solutions to climate change, as well as how we build homes 
and communities.9
3
We need to reconcile our past 
with our future
The West Midlands has a proud industrial past, and our strengths in 
sectors like automotive are deeply embedded in our psyche. Cars are 
not just how many people get around: they are part of who we are. We 
need to take this part of our identity forward without locking the region 
into congestion, polluted air and climate breakdown. This means we 
need to prioritise mobility solutions that support public health and social 
outcomes. 10
4
We need to build more places, 
and more connectivity between 
places
In the West Midlands, we need to build 215,000 homes by 2031 to 
house an additional 500,000 people. Those people will need more than 
a home to live in: schools, shops, GP surgeries, bus routes, broadband 
connections, leisure facilities, places to send their household waste, and 
more. All while investing into the quality and connectivity of existing 
places. Our region needs to grow while our emissions shrink.11
5
We need to save energy and 
resources without reducing 
shared prosperity 
We want people in this region to become more prosperous, together – 
but we will need to do this while reducing demand for energy, resources, 
and recalibrating our demands on the land and natural environment more 
broadly. Moving away from single-use plastics is an active shift that we 
can learn from, but there will need to be a lot of these types of shifts 
happening simultaneously across sectors. 12
The UK context
• UK Climate Change Act 20083: this 
legislates a commitment to 100% reduction 
in greenhouse gas emissions by 2050 from 
1990 levels, with five yearly carbon budgets 
to set actions and review progress. However, 
the level of these budgets is not aligned to the 
Paris Agreement. 
• Committee on Climate Change: This is the 
UK Government’s advisory body on climate 
change. They have highlighted the need to 
close the gap between rhetoric and action – 
setting a carbon reduction target is the ‘easy 
part’ – identifying the actions on how to reach 
it is much more challenging. The areas of 
focus they have suggested are lagging is in 
mobility and the built environment.
• Government target of net zero carbon 
emissions by 2050: so far, national 
level installation of renewables and 
decommissioning of coal has reduced 
emissions from electricity. The UK will 
have phased out coal completely by 2025. 
The continued decarbonisation of energy, 
especially the management of peak demands 
across the power grid, is a significant 
challenge. The Queen’s Speech in October 
2019 introduced a new Environment Bill, 
which will influence how this target and other 
related goals – such as ending the sale of fossil 
fuel powered vehicles by 2040 – are delivered. 
• Clean Growth identified as a Grand 
Challenge at the heart of the UK Industrial 
Strategy: with clean growth identified as a 
Grand Challenge, with missions to at least 
halve the energy use of new buildings by 2030 
and establish the world’s first net-zero carbon 
industrial cluster by 2040 and at least 1 low-
carbon cluster by 2030.• Sustained protests led by Extinction 
Rebellion and Youth Strike 4 Climate: both 
movements have organised local and national 
protests and other types of action to draw 
attention to the need to address climate 
breakdown. Whilst not everyone has been 
won over, the issue is justifiably a high priority 
among a majority of people of all ages. Both 
movements have asked Government to meet 
the reality of climate breakdown with honesty: 
acknowledge the scale of the problem. 
WMCA’s climate emergency declaration 
is that acknowledgment at regional scale 
– although the next step, to meet that 
emergency with the thought, care, and 
resources that requires will take more effort to 
achieve. 
The Local Industrial Strategy and 
economic opportunity
The West Midlands Local Industrial Strategy4 
will boost productivity and earning power in 
a way that is clean and inclusive by focusing 
on distinctive regional economic assets and 
challenges. The region’s clean growth aims 
potentially give local businesses a competitive 
advantage in growing global markets, with exports 
of low carbon goods and services set to be worth 
between £60 billion and £170 billion to the UK by 
20305.
Developed by the region and agreed with 
Government, the Local Industrial Strategy 
creates an investment pathway for the high value, 
high productivity, future-proof sectors that will 
underpin the region’s economy. This plan on a 
page illustrates some of the sector strengths in 
the region. While ‘low carbon technology’ is there 
in its own right, it is vital that each sector makes 
3. See http:/ /www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2008/27/contents13
a positive contribution to the climate challenge – 
building resilience and ensuring that its economic 
activity is low carbon, circular, and resource 
efficient.
The region’s three Local Enterprise Partnerships 
(LEPs) – Coventry & Warwickshire, Black Country 
and Greater Birmingham & Solihull - are leading on 
four of the sectors each, and are in the process of 
writing the associated action plans. Given that this 
is current work, this is an excellent opportunity to 
ensure that these plans make a strong contribution 
to tackling the region’s climate challenge, 
including by coordinating business support.
Fellow travellers
While the West Midlands has a serious challenge 
to face, it is not a challenge we are starting from 
scratch, without capacity or expertise. This is 
a region of innovation, particularly relating to 
energy. It hosts substantial national research and 
innovation assets in the Energy Systems Catapult, 
Climate-KIC, and the universities of Aston, 
Birmingham and Warwick, which are part of the 
Energy Research Accelerator. These universities 
have highly complementary research expertise in 
energy.
Wolverhampton, Coventry and Birmingham 
City University further enhance regional energy 
capabilities, particularly around energy in 
buildings, smart systems, local skills development, 
and industry engagement. Our local authorities 
and LEPs are already working on the means to 
effect the changes we will need to see at a local 
and sub-regional level.
4. See https:/ /assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/802092/west-midlands-local-indus-
trial-strategy-double-page.pdf
5. From Ricardo Energy and Environment for the Committee on Climate Change (2017) UK business opportunities of moving to a low carbon 
economy for the UK’s Clean Growth Strategy (April 2018).
Figure 4 - The West Midlands Local Industry 
Strategy on a page
14
Doing things the West Midlands way
Investing in mitigating and adapting to climate breakdown is essential for the future of this region, but 
it is also an opportunity to make sure that we achieve other goals. WMCA is committed to a model of 
inclusive growth which judges economic activity by the quality of its outcomes for people and place:
A more deliberate and socially purposeful model of economic growth – measured not only by how 
fast or aggressive it is; but also by how well it is created and shared across the whole population 
and place, and by the social and environmental outcomes it realises for our people.6
The WMCA Inclusive Growth Framework lays out ‘what good looks like’ for economic activity, and its 
influence should carry through to the region’s climate action. 
However, this is also part of an international effort, and WMCA will indicate where its efforts will 
contribute to the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)7. This will help the region to 
both benchmark against and learn from local partners. 
Figure 5 - SDG Wheel alongside WMCA's Inclusive Growth Framework
Throughout this section of the document, you will see icons which denote which SDGs relate to how 
the West Midlands will meet the climate change challenge8.
6. 'Inclusive Growth – Update and Next Steps’ WMCA Board, 24 May 2019: https:/ /governance.wmca.org.uk/documents/s2910/Report.pdf
7. See: https:/ /sustainabledevelopment.un.org/sdgs
8. See Footnote 6, which explains each of the SDGs in detail.
15
When it comes to assembling investment cases for 
this work, the SDGs will form an important part of 
how we demonstrate that we are focusing on the 
right things, and delivering against the social and 
environmental outcomes that people of this region 
will judge us by.
In that spirit, the West Midlands will:
1. Respect subsidiarity: leadership on tackling 
climate change will come from individuals, 
households, organisations, neighbourhoods, 
public institutions, universities, central 
Government, and everything in between. The 
WMCA will ensure that it creates the right 
spaces for leadership, partnership and action, 
and will know when to lead, when to follow, 
when to ask difficult questions, and when to 
make space. Furthermore, we will be open 
to learning from other places – nationally 
and internationally – that have already made 
progress on the same journey.
2. Build wealth, and recycle it throughout 
the region through skills and community 
ownership: people in the West Midlands 
can become more prosperous as we invest 
into tackling climate breakdown. Developing 
skills that meet the challenges of climate 
breakdown are useful beyond the region, and 
have a clear, motivating social purpose. The 
generation and storage of clean energy and 
heat will always be in demand. Municipal, 
co-operative or local business ownership of 
generating capacity provides stability to the 
region’s energy systems, and a revenue stream 
that can be invested back into places and 
people.3. Boost health and wellbeing: many aspects 
of tackling climate breakdown align with 
improving health and wellbeing. Spending 
time outdoors in green space. Active travel. 
Breathing cleaner air. Living in a comfortable 
home. A steady income. Investments into 
tackling climate change will put these 
opportunities front and centre.
4. Take a ‘circular’ approach: circular economies 
‘design out’ waste and pollution, keep 
products and materials in use, and regenerate 
natural systems. This encompasses the 
reduction, re-use, and recycling of waste, as 
well our commitment to biodiversity net gain 
and the quality and quantity of our green 
spaces, canals, rivers, and lakes . There are 
also economic opportunities – through the 
bieconomy, for example – that could be 
explored in how we work with our waste 
streams.
5. Invest in comfortable homes and buildings:  
whether a home, commercial unit or 
community building is old or new, it should 
be easy and affordable to keep it at a 
comfortable temperature (encompassing 
heating and cooling). Investing into the energy 
performance of buildings can help to achieve 
this, addressing homelessness, fuel poverty 
and waste.
16
6. Make space for sustainable transport: space 
is precious, and how we use it for travel needs 
to reflect our priorities. Alongside tackling 
climate breakdown, our priorities are reducing 
congestion and pollution. As such, space 
will gradually and thoughtfully be allocated 
away from solo occupancy cars, and towards 
walking, cycling, and mass transit.
7. Champion young leadership: this is a young 
region, and it is because of young leaders that 
we are focusing on adapting to and mitigating 
climate breakdown. Continuing in that spirit, 
we will invest into the creativity, education, 
skills and capabilities of young people in this 
region, and will make space for them to create 
and lead.
8. Unite people across the region by creating 
common cause and addressing inequalities: 
tackling climate breakdown should be seen as 
a common cause, around which people from 
the region can unite. In a time where priorities 
are shifting, we can seize on the movement 
to ensure that people who are economically 
and democratically excluded have a part to 
play – closing gender, ethnicity, and disability 
employment and activity gaps. Those people 
are already more likely to be exposed to the 
negative impacts of climate change. It can 
also support the region’s violence reduction 
agenda. Neither crime nor violence are 
inevitable, and we will use investments 
into tackling climate breakdown to create 
opportunities for people to live lives free of 
both.
17
Case study - Core Cities
Collaboration on shared goals
Core Cities UK, an advocacy group representing the ten largest cities outside 
of London (including Birmingham), worked together to create a series of ‘asks’ 
that each will need from Central Government to meet the climate challenge:
• £1bn Low Carbon City Investment Fund to support and accelerate high 
impact green projects.
• £1bn Clean Air Fund to support the delivery of clean air zones, estimated 
to be worth £6.5bn to the economy. 
• Tax and incentives to boost and encourage investment in low carbon 
enterprises.
• A target of 2025 for net-zero buildings to minimise the impact of the 
millions of homes which the Core Cities will be required to build.
• Whole Building Retrofit fund of at least £1bn a year to enable all homes to 
have a whole-house efficiency treatment by 2035, focussing on those in 
fuel poverty first with a ‘able to pay’ initiative for wealthier households.
• Investment in transport infrastructure to reduce road congestion. 18
The investments we make in order to meet 
the climate challenge will be into the people 
who need them to thrive: tackling fuel poverty, 
giving people space to change career direction, 
improving skills, providing affordable connectivity, 
cleaning the air and ensuring the quality and 
availability of public spaces and assets.
What does this look like?
We prepare thoroughly for the economic shifts 
we can anticipate
This is about the human side of big economic 
shifts. No-one wants to look another person in the 
eye and tell them that, soon, no-one will be able 
to buy what they are selling. This is a region that 
remembers what it is like to lose industry, a local 
brand, or a beloved high street retailer. That isn’t 
just about a job that pays the bills, important as 
that is. It is about doing something purposeful, 
something that makes you proud, something that 
matters to the people you know and the place you 
call home.
All of this means that we cannot take this part for 
granted. Some of these changes will be painful, 
even if we manage them with care and precision. 
To soothe that sting, our new industries will have a 
sense of place and pride, a story we can all shape 
and tell.People have space to learn new skills and 
broaden their horizons without risking poverty
Changing career is not easy, even when you have 
space to plan. Many people will not have that – 
every hour they spend in training, development, 
or even thought is an hour they could be spent 
earning money, or caring for their families. We 
need to give people space in their minds and their 
budgets, so that they can work out what they 
would like to do, and how they would like to get 
there, without being pushed into illness or poverty. 
Everyone’s air is safe to breathe
The emissions that pollute the air and warm the 
planet are not always the same ones10, but there 
is a great deal of overlap, and they stem from 
the same behaviours – burning fossil fuels in the 
places where people travel, live, work, and play.
No-one has to choose between heating and 
eating
People in energy poverty cannot afford energy to 
meet their needs, and often have to choose what 
to do without: transport, hot food, or a warm 
home. The poor energy efficiency of many homes 
contributes to this dilemma. There are 1.7 million 
existing houses in the West Midlands, and at least 
200,000 of these are in ‘energy poverty’. In order 
for everyone to stay on the journey to 2041, people 
must be able to afford the energy they need to 
participate in society. 
10. Air pollution tends to be caused by soot (PM10 and PM2.5), oxides of nitrogen (NOx) and ozone (O3).Actions
We will change our economy 
without leaving anyone 
behind19
EXAMPLE ACTIONS
Changing our economy without leaving any of our communities behind
First five years Secure 
Government 
support for an 
enhanced ‘Clean 
Air Deal’ for the 
regionLaunch 
communications 
campaign to 
celebrate the 
pride and skill of 
‘green jobs’Secure devolution 
of Energy 
Company 
Obligation funding 
to WMCALearn from 
existing clean 
air policies and 
expand in line 
with network 
improvements
Explore 
partnership with 
DWP to pilot 
proactive welfare 
support for 
people in at-risk 
industriesSecure resource 
to drive energy 
efficiency 
standards for 
private rented 
sector homesStrengthen 
energy efficiency 
standards for 
private rented 
sector homes to 
EPC ‘C’Introduce LHA+ 
to incentivise 
energy efficiency 
in private rented 
sector homes
Design a regional 
pay-as-you-save 
home retrofit 
scheme, backed 
by a low-cost 
borrowing lineSecure means to 
help all places 
in the region to 
shift to LED street 
lighting
Between five and 
fifteen yearsCollaborate to 
create joined-up 
skills support 
mechanism for 
people in at-risk 
industriesExpand ‘Mobility 
Credits’ vehicle 
scrappage scheme 
to the whole 
regionWork with 
Treasury to 
change Green 
Book standards 
for long term 
investment
The last five years The sale of petrol 
and diesel vehicles 
is banned by 
2040, in line with 
national targets
Changing our economy without 
leaving anyone behind: the first 
five years
• New investment standards based on 
climate impact: in negotiating the region’s 
next devolution deal, the region will work 
with Government to broker new investment 
standards for the West Midlands. In this way, 
all public spending can be judged by the 
positive social and environmental outcomes it 
creates, and not on GVA uplift alone. 
• Expansion of low emission places: learning 
from the current development work on 
Birmingham’s Clean Air Zones, and the car exclusion zone pilots around schools that have 
been run in Birmingham and Solihull, places 
across the region will collaborate to plan how 
this can be expanded in line with upgrades to 
the transport network.
• Review of Movement for Growth: Transport 
for West Midlands (TfWM) has already 
started the process of reviewing the strategy, 
with climate emergency as one of its key 
themes. This is partly about ensuring credible, 
sustainable public transport, partly about 
reducing demand, but also, ensuring that 
the region is able to balance the delivery of 
goods to people and businesses with the need 
to create safe spaces for people to walk and 20
11. See https:/ /governance.wmca.org.uk/documents/s3029/Report.pdf
12. Local Housing Allowance – essentially, the rates used to calculate how much housing benefit can be paid in rent to private sector landlords. 
13. See https:/ /assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/7812/138355.pdf
14. See https:/ /www.gov.uk/government/consultations/energy-company-obligation-eco3-2018-to-2022
15. See: https:/ /www.ukmba.org
16. See: https:/ /www.bwbuk.orgcycle. The ‘last mile’ is particularly important 
to get right, notably the demand for home 
delivery continues to escalate.
• Enforcement and strengthening of energy 
efficiency standards: secure resources to 
enforce Minimum Energy Efficiency Standards 
(MEES) regulations for private rented 
sector (PRS) properties – currently need to 
achieve an EPC rating of E. In addition, seek 
Government support to strengthen the MEES 
threshold from E to C.
• Introduction of LHA+: As per the 
development work of WMCA Homelessness 
Taskforce11, develop a new deal – LHA+12  - 
with PRS landlords who are willing to commit 
to good standards and fair access. This would 
involve landlords agreeing to meet the Decent 
Homes13 standard, provide reasonable lengths 
of tenancy, and accept tenants referred by 
local authorities. This could equate to social 
rents at 50th percentile.
• ECO devolution: continue to pursue 
devolution of Energy Company Obligation 
(ECO) 314 funding, including of the ability to 
join up fragmented funds for more effective 
local delivery.
• Pay-as-you-save energy efficiency scheme:  
scope a regional energy efficiency scheme 
using prudential borrowing, or other financial 
products like green bonds. These could be 
backed by various sources, including the 
UK Municipal Bonds Agency15, institutional 
investors, and innovative start-ups like 
Bankers Without Boundaries16.
Changing our economy without 
leaving anyone behind: between 
five and fifteen years
• Focused support for people in at-risk jobs: 
collaboration to merge resources from 
education, adult skills, social security, and 
industry to create focused support for people 
working in ‘at risk’ industries, as well as for 
people who would like to return to the labour 
market. 
• Pride in green jobs campaign: develop a 
campaign where the stories of people who do 
work that contributes to meeting the climate challenge are given space to tell their stories, 
so we can share in the pride and purpose of 
their work. 
• Financial support for people moving from 
at-risk roles: develop a protocol which 
creates financial provision for people working 
in ‘at risk’ industries, as part of the offer to 
incentivise retraining.
• Mobility Credits expansion: explore creating 
a regional vehicle scrappage scheme 
wherein it is more advantageous to swap a 
petrol powered car for a travel pass or CAZ-
compliant secondhand car than it is to trade 
it for a new vehicle. This is currently being 
piloted in the West Midlands as ‘Mobility 
Credits’. A variant on this policy could be 
introduced for business with significant fleet.
Changing our economy without 
leaving anyone behind: the final 
five years
• Government: as outlined by the Government’s 
Clean Growth Strategy, the sale of new petrol 
and diesel vehicles will be banned in the UK 
from 2040 onwards. 
• WMCA/Councils/Government: there will be 
no fossil fuel powered vehicles permitted on 
the roads of the West Midlands, with safer 
spaces for walking and cycling. 21
Changes to the climate are likely to mean that the West Midlands experiences higher rainfall and 
a greater likelihood of extreme temperatures. These changes will occur, even in the IPCC’s17 most 
optimistic scenario – 1.5 degrees of warming18. This means that we need to invest in our ability to 
live with both of those things: by enhancing green spaces, designing out flooding and extreme 
temperatures from our places, and upgrading our infrastructure.
If we breach 1.5 degrees of warming, we can expect all of these impacts to intensify, along with 
increased migration of people globally, and higher potential for biodiversity loss and vector-borne 
disease. All of this will require a different approach to maintenance, investment and development of 
our places.
What does this look like?
We plant trees and other greenery to help us manage increased temperatures and rainfall
Our investment in tree planting is not about aesthetics alone: we plant strategically, based on evidence 
around the need for cooling, exposure to flooding, and to achieve maximum carbon sequestration. 
This means planting in places which we would otherwise develop and improving our approach to 
forestry management. We will also need to be conscious of the interplay between urban greening and 
microgeneration – e.g. sometimes you can have a combined green roof and solar array, but on other 
occasions, you have to choose between them, depending on what is most suitable for the area. 
17. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
18. Special Report – Global Warming of 1.5ºc: https:/ /www.ipcc.ch/sr15We will invest in the resilience 
of our places22
Case study - Scandiasgade 
Park, Copenhagen
A community park that alleviates flooding
Copenhagen is well known for its urban 
green credentials. Aiming to be carbon 
neutral by 2025, it is one of Europe’s 
leading cities in addressing climate 
change. 
Nonetheless, it is still looking to improve 
social inclusion, resilience and liveability 
in its approach to tackling urban renewal 
and development. As such, the city has 
prioritised a number of areas for more 
in-depth community-facing work around 
the role that climate change solutions 
might play in day-to-day life; including 
the role of nature-based solutions in 
improving adaptation. 
Copenhagen has increasingly suffered detrimental effects from flooding. For 
example, in July 2011, a huge storm struck the city with rainfall higher than 
the estimated 2000-year return period. There was significant infrastructure 
damage across Copenhagen with claims from building owners exceeding 
£800m. So they took action. In Sydhavnen District a citizen-based approach 
was taken to develop adaptation measures to reduce the risk of future 
flooding. What was developed was a pocket park, Scandiasgade Park.
The park that was finally built is around 13m wide and 365m long. It is divided 
into ‘zones’ that support nature (for example an area with plants to attract 
pollinators) as well as community-focused areas – for example a ‘beach’-style 
park, with charging infrastructure so that community events can be held 
there. These zones are sunk below the level of the pavement and roads, with 
an elevated walkway across them all. The park, which is yet to be tested by a 
major flood event, can absorb approximately 1,500m3 of rainwater.
23
Case study - A vision for the 
Cole Valley
Investing to benefit wildlife, heritage and people
This vision was published 
in October 2019 by the 
Environment Agency and 
the Tame Valley Wetlands 
Landscape Partnership. It 
covers a substantial section 
of the River Cole, and is split 
into two elements. Firstly, 
to drive “cultural interest” 
in the area, to encourage 
investment. Secondly, 
investing in biodiversity, flood mitigation and water quality enhancements, 
ensuring that the River Cole and its surrounds continue to benefit the wildlife 
and residents of Birmingham, Solihull and North Warwickshire for many years 
to come.
Underpinning the vision are four  objectives:
• Create  a high quality blue/green corridor along the River Cole through 
East Birmingham, North Solihull and North Warwickshire that can be used 
as an alternative travel route for local or commuting journeys without the 
car.
• Enhance the natural and historic environment, improve biodiversity and 
water quality, reduce flood risk and highlight the opportunities for natural 
capital and environmental net gain.
• Re-connect local communities and businesses with their local public 
open space, help them value what the River provides for them, improving 
wellbeing and resilience through social prescribing and identifying links 
between behavioural change and flooding/environmental improvements.
• Stimulate partnership working across multiple stakeholders to coordinate 
approaches to catchment-wide issues, deliver local policy aspirations and 
unlock multiple funding opportunities. 
24
We ensure that land is used wisely
It is impossible to become a ‘self-sufficient’ region when it comes to local food production, but we can 
ensure that the food we produce has high nutritional value, suits the locality, and makes best possible 
use of the space. We will also need to think about the resilience of the food we import19, which will be 
subject to increased demand due to population growth, geopolitical tensions and locked-in climate 
breakdown. 
Case study - Saturn Bioponics
Soace and resource-efficient food production
Saturn Bioponics, based in Birmingham, is one of the first 3D ‘vertical farming’ 
businesses to create a business model that can grow and sell healthy food at 
commercial scale. Their model is based on hydroponics, which has a higher 
production rate and lower environmental impact than soil farming, and gives 
people clarity on how their food has been produced. 
It also means that land which is unsuitable for soil farming could be used to 
produce food – an option for brownfield land.
The blend of catchment-wide and locality approaches is consistent with the 
spirit of this plan, and will boost the resilience of places along the river to 
climate breakdown.
19. See ‘Back From The Future’ by Birmingham Food Council, which indicates that our imported food – which currently comprises 40% of our 
intake – is likely to no longer be available by 2050: https:/ /www.birminghamfoodcouncil.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/09/BackFromTheFu-
ture_HorizonScanningProjectReport_BirminghamFoodCouncil_January2018.pdf25
EXAMPLE ACTIONS
Investing in the resilience of our places
First five years Deliver Natural 
Capital Investment 
Plan (currently in 
development)Bus shelters 
located in places 
at risk of flooding 
and overheating 
to include green 
roofsBuild a workforce 
strategy and 
investment 
programme 
for the natural 
environmentLaunch comms 
campaign to 
enable people 
to nurture and 
develop urban 
greenery
Collaborate 
to strengthen 
local planning 
requirements for 
green spacesEstablish the 
‘West Midlands 
National Park’, 
to include active 
managementLaunch West 
Midlands ‘crowd 
planting’ tree 
challenge: one 
tree for each 
resident.Work with TfWM 
and partners to 
create ‘climate 
audit’ on resilience 
of current network
Between five and 
fifteen yearsExpansion of 
Natural Capital 
Investment PlanCreate 
employment ‘deal’ 
for the natural 
environmentCollaborate to 
create and deliver 
a sustainable 
urban drainage 
investment planPlanting of ‘green 
barriers’ between 
motorways 
and homes or 
workplaces.
Contribute to 
the formation of 
a national Food 
Security Institute
The last five years Sustainable 
urban drainage 
plan delivered in 
vulnerable areasInvestments made 
into food security, 
coordinated 
nationally26
Investing in the resilience of our 
places: the first five years
• Natural Capital investment begins: the 
Natural Capital Investment Strategy and 
Delivery Programme (currently in its early 
stages) will be delivered. 
• Urban greening on transport infrastructure: 
bus and Metro shelters located in places 
exposed to heat and flooding could be 
replaced with ‘green roof’ shelters. 
• West Midlands National Park: developing 
the commitment to creating a regional 
National Park, building on work developed by 
Birmingham City University. 
• Expanded natural environment workforce:  
explore development of a workforce strategy 
for the natural environment, drawing on 
employment pathways that already exist 
in the sector – e.g. the Heritage Lottery 
funded ‘Natural Prospects’ scheme run by the 
Birmingham & Black Country Wildlife Trust20. 
• West Midlands ‘crowd planting’ tree 
challenge: WMCA commitment to plant a 
tree for every resident, via a ‘crowd planting’ 
platform.Investing in the resilience of our 
places: between five and fifteen 
years
• Expansion of natural capital investment: 
explore expansion of the initial WMCA 
Natural Capital Investment Plan, enabling 
investments in green and blue spaces across 
the region – this will take both biodiversity 
net gain and boosting resilience to climate 
breakdown into account. 
• Sustainable Urban Drainage investment 
plan: attracting investment in the ability of 
developed places to deal with increased 
rainfall via the use of sustainable urban 
drainage systems. 
• Employment deal for the natural environment: 
explore development of an employment deal 
for the natural environment, working with 
FE colleges, universities and other training 
providers to incentivise transition into careers 
linked with climate adaptation and the natural 
environment.
20. See: https:/ /www.bbcwildlife.org.uk/naturalprospects27
This is a region of many perspectives, and 
many stories, bound together by challenge 
and opportunity. The industrial revolution that 
changed the world, started here. People came to 
the West Midlands from the world over: to work, 
create, and trade. The idea of local government 
shaping its place and economy was brought to 
life by Joseph Chamberlain. Things have changed 
a great deal since then but the region is proud 
of its history, its heritage, and the work that has 
shaped us all. Today, the West Midlands still has 
the highest concentration of manufacturers of 
any region, and accounts for nine percent of all 
manufacturing employment in Britain.
This identity looks slightly different across the 
region. In the east, there is an emphasis on 
transport and mobility, where Coventry’s strength 
in transport and automotive grew out of over 
250 companies manufacturing bicycles. In the 
west, there are still over 240 medium-sized 
businesses focused on traditional metal forming 
and component production, largely for the 
high-technology and demanding aerospace and 
automotive supply chains.
Now we need to write some new chapters for our 
new challenges. A West Midlands that is powerful 
enough to power itself: via its democratic 
institutions, its businesses, and its energy systems. 
A West Midlands where smart technology and 
low carbon connectivity create shared prosperity.  
A West Midlands where we come up with place 
and people-focused solutions to big challenges 
and export them to the world. A West Midlands 
where anyone and everyone contributes to our 
shared missions, and where different kinds of 
contributions are valued equally.
What does this look like?
We will have an energy system which responds to 
our needs and is controlled by the region’s people, 
businesses and public sector institutions
Between 2018 and 2030, more than £15bn will 
be invested in local energy projects across the 
WMCA. £74bn will be spent on products and 
services where the quality of local energy systems 
will determine how well our businesses will 
perform against global competitors, and how 
easy and comfortable the lives of citizens will be. 
Finally, a further £80bn will be spent on fuel and 
power for our industry, our transport, and our 
home lives. All of this investment will have to be 
made in a way which helps us meet the climate 
challenge while increasing prosperity – and 
devolution will be fundamental to realising that 
opportunity. We will use our industrial past 
to create a new future28
Work underway - West 
Midlands Regional Energy 
Strategy
Planning for future energy systems
This is the region’s vision for energy across the region by 2030. It has been 
developed by Energy Capital, a regional, cross-sector partnership that has 
formed to address and overcome the structural issues with the UK energy 
system.  It includes the following aspects:
• Reducing energy costs for our strategic industrial sectors to at least match 
those of our international competitors. 
• Reducing the incidence of fuel poverty across our region by hitting current 
government targets for energy efficient housing five years ahead of 
schedule.
• Delivering the West Midlands’ share of national and global carbon budgets 
by reducing regional carbon emissions. 
• Creating a regional energy infrastructure that adds £1bn to GVA by 
2025 by putting the region at the leading edge of the global energy and 
transport systems transition.
The main delivery mechanism 
for this vision is Energy 
Innovation Zones (EIZs): 
local partnerships which are 
brought together to focus 
on the energy innovation 
and investment needs of 
their place. The first four 
pilot EIZs have already been 
established, and will act as 
a focus for energy systems 
investment of between 
£270m and £490m over the 
next 15 years.
29
There is a significant opportunity for the regional energy economy: the more 
we can generate, the less we need to import. Although the local energy 
sector contributes approximately £2.1bn of GVA to the regional economy, 
most of this is earned outside the region. Furthermore, it is dominated by 
companies like E.ON, who sell energy nationally. Businesses and households 
in the West Midlands spend £6.7bn annually on energy, and more on average 
than their European competitors. Over £960m is spent by the industrial and 
manufacturing sectors and an additional £540m by the remainder of the 
commercial and industrial sector.
Case study - Genius Hub
A heating system that learns from you
Created in Dudley and now based in Birmingham, Genius Hub helps people 
use smart technology to keep their homes comfortable and energy efficient. 
They specialise in managing ‘complex’ environments: large properties (more 
than three bedrooms) or non-standard heating such as underfloor, ground 
source heat pump, biomass and solar.
30
Case study - International 
Synergies21
Enabling complex industrial networks to design out 
waste
International Synergies, which has its head office in Birmingham, is a world 
leader in ‘industrial symbiosis’. In simple terms, this is when surplus resources 
generated by an industrial process are redirected into another process by 
one or more other companies, providing a mutual benefit or ‘symbiosis’. It 
works to facilitate links between those companies, by building networks 
of companies that can use one another’s waste. With this expertise in the 
region, WMCA, local businesses and partners are in a good place to build 
symbiotic networks in key areas and sectors.
21. See https:/ /www.international-synergies.comOur industrial processes will work in ‘symbiosis’, with waste from one 
part of production supplying another31
EXAMPLE ACTIONS
Using our industrial past to create a zero-carbon future
First five years Investment 
prospectus and 
fund for energy 
system innovationEnsure Energy 
Innovation 
Zones have 
the necessary  
regulatory 
flexibilityInfluence 
Government 
policies on 
renewables and 
carbon storageWork with LEPs 
to ensure LIS 
maximises climate 
investment goals
Commission a 
regional industrial 
symbiosis 
investment planDevelop fiscal and 
R&D incentives to 
support auto OEM 
shift to EVsRoll out 
collaborative 
solution to EV-
charging at-
scale (e.g. ULEV 
strategy)WM5G team to 
work with public 
services to create 
infrastructure 
for more remote 
working 
Between five and 
fifteen yearsWork with 
Government to 
ensure energy 
costs are 
apportioned 
strategically to 
boost key sectorsUK Battery 
Industrialisation 
Centre in 
Coventry 
operationalRoll out in-
school education 
programmes, 
e.g. UN Climate 
teachers in 
schoolsWork with 
Universities and 
providers to 
create regional 
‘cluster’ of climate 
change education
Using our industrial past to create 
a zero-carbon future: the first five 
years
• Energy systems innovation fund: create a 
specialist investment fund to unlock energy 
systems innovation as part of an overall ‘deal’ 
for the energy economy. 
• Create regulatory flexibility for Energy 
Innovation Zones: collaborate with legislators 
and regulators to detail the legal implications 
and requirements for Energy Innovation Zones 
(EIZs).
• Influence energy generation, storage and 
distribution policies: in line with the UK 
Government’s own commitments, ensure 
that the region is able to influence its policies 
relating to renewable energy, heat, and energy 
storage. 
• Boost generation and sale of energy in 
the region: support existing city-led efforts 
to create energy infrastructure that keeps 
money from the sale of energy recirculating 
in the area.  These initiatives could be led in 
a number of ways and could support people 
on low incomes through more appropriately designed social tariffs.
• Design in industrial symbiosis: commission 
an industrial symbiosis investment plan, to 
work out the areas with most potential for 
carbon reduction, resource efficiency and 
return on investment and which could keep 
resource and build eco-supply chains within 
the region.
Using our industrial past to create 
a zero-carbon future: between five 
and fifteen years
• Strategic allocation of energy infrastructure 
costs: use regulation to ‘favour’ key sectors 
when it comes to the apportionment of 
energy infrastructure costs. It may not be 
long until the price of fuels essentially falls to 
zero. In this situation, it follows pricing cannot 
meaningfully be based directly on usage. 
Instead, it will be entirely focused on ensuring 
infrastructure investment costs are recovered 
and this may be done in a number of ways to 
meet industrial strategy or political objectives.32
When we build transport infrastructure, or 
new neighbourhoods, we will use low carbon 
processes and materials, making use of recycled 
and repurposed materials. The ways in which 
we adapt existing places will need to considered 
– ensuring that everyone benefits, and that 
the place retains its identity and appeal. These 
challenges will enable us to build expertise in 
‘urban transition’; essentially, how you change a 
region from being reliant on fossil fuels, resource 
extraction and at risk of flooding, to one that is 
low carbon, resource efficient, and resilient. 
What does this look like?
All new build infrastructure is constructed 
thoughtfully and is energy efficient
WMCA has ambitious plans to build a further 
215,000 homes by 2031. As well as the emissions 
associated with construction, this could easily add 
£100-300m to annual regional energy spending (at 
current prices). As such, ensuring that new homes 
are zero carbon and are able to generate and store 
renewable energy will be an economic boost to 
the region.
The UK Green Building Council suggests that to 
put the UK on course to meet both domestic and 
international climate change commitments, all 
buildings must be net zero carbon in operation 
before 2050, with new buildings meeting this 
standard by 2030. WMCA is aiming to deliver on 
both sets of commitments so will align with both 
targets.The challenges of achieving this are not (on the 
whole) technical in nature. What is required is 
innovation in business models, regulations, and in 
the delivery and financing mechanisms.We will create places and 
connections that help us to 
meet the climate challenge33
Learning from the past - The 
Green Deal
Pay as you save energy efficiency
The Green Deal was a Government-backed ‘pay as you save’ policy that existed 
between 2013 and 2015. 
The concept was simple: people would install energy-saving measures in their 
homes by taking out a ‘Green Deal Loan’, which remained attached to the house. 
People paid nothing up front on the expectation that they – and future residents of 
that home – would pay the loan back via savings realised in their energy bills. 
The WMCA could develop a similar policy, but there were a number of faults in the 
implementation of the original that we need to learn from22:
• Demand: people did not want the energy saving measures that they needed 
the most – notably internal and external solid wall insulation. Both measures are 
disruptive to home life, with long payback times, and were not well understood 
by homeowners, who had been ‘sold’ the Green Deal based on financial savings 
rather than thermal comfort. Furthermore, the least efficient homes tended to 
be in private ownership making it hard to treat multiple properties at once – for 
example, an entire terrace. This suggests that demand for these measures will 
need to be stimulated via incentives, regulation, or a combination of the two. 
• Finance: demand for Green Deal Loans was suppressed by being more 
expensive23 than other comparable forms of borrowing. For people who could 
access credit, it was more cost effective to extend a mortgage, or to take out a 
secured loan.  
• Value for money: the Green Deal Finance Company invested £25m in its set-
up costs to service activity that was never undertaken, and the Department for 
Energy and Climate Change (DECC) did not have voting rights on its board (so 
could not stop this). Being able to start small and scale with demand is key to 
realising value for money. 
• Data:  it was hard to measure progress on key objectives like fuel poverty 
because DECC did not have access to the right data – notably on household 
income. It was also tricky to blend Green Deal measures with existing fuel 
poverty support.
Crucially, succeeding at delivering energy efficiency at scale will mean that the 
region will need to be able to pool different kinds of support and investment and set 
its own definition of what success looks like.
22. Laid out by the Public Accounts Committee, see https:/ /publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201617/cmselect/cmpubacc/125/125.pdf?utm_
source=125&utm_medium=module&utm_campaign=modulereports
23. Interest rates on Green Deal Loans were between 7% and 10%. 34
We move around the region using 
mass transit and active travel
Car journeys are on the wrong trajectory in this 
region – anyone who has been stuck in traffic will 
recognise this. While there has been a small fall 
in overall emissions, the improving efficiency of 
vehicles means that the number of car journeys 
has actually increased. 
It is not practical to transfer this use over to 
electric vehicles. The Regional Energy Strategy 
sets this out: the 42,547 GWh of energy currently 
delivered to vehicles in the region as petrol and 
diesel24 is nearly equal to the amount of energy 
delivered through the entire gas network in the 
region and almost twice that delivered by the 
electricity system. The implications for local energy infrastructure of shifting transport fuel use 
from petrol to electricity or gas are significant. 
As such, a lot of that demand will need to be met 
or otherwise eliminated by mass transit or active 
travel.
If this carries through, by the time we reach 
2041, a majority of people will not own cars, 
with most car use taken up on an ad hoc basis 
through electric car clubs. All other journeys are 
completed by walking, cycling, scoots, and use of 
buses, Metro and trains. 
EXAMPLE ACTIONS
Using our industrial past to create a zero-carbon future
First five years Work with 
Government to 
improve National 
Planning Policy 
FrameworkWMCA and 
Councils explore 
introduction 
of zero carbon 
standard for new 
buildsRegional 
Design Guide 
principles to be 
applied to new 
developmentsDevelop a regional 
investment plan 
for renewable 
heating and 
cooling
Partner with 
Cemex and other 
industry partners 
to create low 
carbon cement 
supply chainDevelop other 
industrial 
symbiosis 
solutions for key 
infrastructure‘Sprint’ bus rapid 
transit routesExplore potential 
of fiscal levers to 
manage demand 
and invest in 
sustainable 
infrastructure
New Metro Lines Approve strategy 
for electric 
car charging 
infrastructureGoogle 
partnership on 
Environmental 
Insights ExplorerReallocate 
highway space to 
walking, cycling 
and mass transit
Increased 
suburban rail and 
park and ride 
capacity at train 
stationsEvaluate the 
impact of 
potential bus 
regulation on 
climate impactAccelerated 
transition of  
buses to low 
carbon, low 
pollution variantsDeliver first 
tranche of Better 
Streets Fund
Between five and 
fifteen yearsCouncils to use 
licensing to 
migrate all taxis to 
electric carsDeliver at least 
one ‘electric 
bus town’ with 
Government 
investmentUse smart 
technology to help 
people save time 
and energyBirmingham 
Airport commits 
to net zero carbon 
and is on track for 
2041
24. Worth around £3.3bn per year35
Creating and connecting clean, 
sustainable places: the first five 
years
• NPPF reform: collaborate to reform the 
National Planning Policy Framework to ensure 
that planning authorities have a robust basis 
on which to demand zero carbon / carbon 
negative developments and to assist localities 
in improving transport and in planning their 
decentralised energy and waste systems.
• Zero carbon homes standard: explore 
introducing a zero carbon homes standard 
for all new builds – this can occur without a 
change to Building Regulations25. Collaborate 
with other regions to reduce ‘gaming’ of the 
changes by developers. 
• Design Charter to shape new 
neighbourhoods: aim for the Design Charter, 
which provides guidance to developers 
building new homes with WMCA resources 
(including on low carbon construction, 
operation, and resilience), to be applied to all 
new developments. 
• Investment plan for renewable heating and 
cooling: develop a joint regional investment 
plan for renewable heating and cooling, 
including any planned expansions of the 
region’s existing district heating networks and 
introduction of technologies like anaerobic 
digestion26 (AD). The first investments should 
be signed off by the end of this period. 
• Decarbonise cement: create a plan in 
conjunction with Cemex and other industry 
partners to replace all cement used in regional 
construction with low carbon alternatives. 
• Waste into infrastructure: work with 
International Synergies and other industrial 
symbiosis experts to assess the potential in 
using locally produced industrial waste to 
create building and construction materials – 
for example, in creating bitumen surfaces for 
highways. 
• More green space: collaborate to increase 
planning requirements for green space and 
energy efficiency.• Boost numbers of electric taxis: use licensing 
to encourage take-up of electric taxis.  
• Reallocate parking spaces: as pricing 
structures are updated, explore reallocating 
parking spaces to car shares and electric 
vehicles and reduce parking charges for both 
as an incentive. 
• New fiscal levers: identify new revenue 
streams to invest in walking, cycling, and 
public transport. 
• Fewer parking spaces in new developments:  
over the medium-term, ensure that parking 
spaces per dwelling is reduced across the 
area, but notably in city centres, where 
density is highest and existing public transport 
access is greatest. 
• A regional approach to ULEV: approve 
electric vehicle strategy at WMCA Board 
in early 2020, which outlines a collective 
approach to installing charging infrastructure 
across the region. 
• Refresh Movement for Growth: refresh of 
the West Midlands Movement for Growth 
transport strategy to further the detail and 
thought on how the transport network can 
help the region meet the climate challenge 
– both in terms of resilience and the overall 
carbon budget. 
• More space for walking and cycling:  
continue reallocating road space to walking, 
cycling, and mass transit. Consider creating a 
regional body for walking and cycling so that 
investments made as part of Movement for 
Growth can be held accountable to the overall 
goal of achieving a modal shift that aligns to 
the climate challenge. We need to continue 
to create a ‘buzz’ around walking and cycling 
– telling stories which show how good life can 
be when you move around in this way. 
• More powers to invest for change: assess 
the powers and investment that are needed 
at regional and local level to unlock necessary 
changes in the transport network. This 
could include analysis to assess whether bus 
regulation powers as outlined in the 2017 Bus 
Services Act will help to deliver a low carbon, 
well-used bus network relative to the status 
quo.
25. See https:/ /www.ukgbc.org/ukgbc-work/advancing-net-zero/
26. AD comes in various forms, but in essence, turns putrescible waste (like food) into biogas, which can be used in gas-fired heating systems.36
Creating and connecting clean, 
sustainable places: between five 
and fifteen years
• Net zero airport: Birmingham Airport 
commits to reaching net zero, ideally at the 
same time as the wider region in 2041.
• Smart places: learning from the 5G testbed 
pilots and existing technology, we will deploy 
smart technology in a way that enables low 
carbon living whilst respecting people’s rights.  
We will ensure that people can live good 
lives without doing irreparable harm to the 
environment. This is partly about only using 
low carbon energy but it is also about reducing, 
reusing, recycling and recovering waste – in 
our day-to-day lives, but also at work and in 
our industrial processes. It is also about how 
we source our food, and how we consume the 
goods and services that enhance our lives. As 
businesses, consumers and regulators make the 
shift to processes and lifestyles that regenerate 
the environment, boost adaptation and minimise 
harm, there are exciting business opportunities 
that we can benefit from.
27. See https:/ /www.ukgbc.org/news/government-confirms-local-authorities-can-set-energy-standards-beyond-part-l-in-nppf/
28. AD comes in various forms, but in essence, turns putrescible waste (like food) into biogas, which can be used in gas-fired heating systems.We will decouple prosperity 
from consumption of energy 
and resources37
Work underway - setting the 
WMCA carbon budget
Ensuring that balancing emissions is taken as seriously 
as balancing budgets
The WMCA’s ‘carbon budget’ – the maximum CO2 associated with energy use 
in WMCA area – is tethered to the UK’s Paris Agreement commitments. The 
latest scientific consensus on climate change in the IPCC Special Report on 
1.5°C28 is used as the starting point for setting sub-national carbon budgets 
that enable the UK to meet this commitment. Shipping and aviation are 
not included, as both are being dealt with in a separate, national carbon 
budget for those activities. Land use, land use change and forestry (LULUCF) 
should be seen as a separate piece of work, focused on increasing carbon 
sequestration from these sources.
Based on these parameters, the Tyndall Centre for Climate Change Research 
suggests that a budget of 126 million tonnes (MtCO2) for the years 2020 to 
2100 should amount to a fair contribution. The zero carbon year (2041) is 
defined as the point at which WMCA’s annual average CO2 emissions fall 
below a threshold level of 0.9 MtCO2 – over 96% lower than 2015 levels.
Given that WMCA used 21MtCO2 in 2016, this will be a huge challenge – if we 
carried on emitting at that level, we would blow the entire budget in six years, 
and lock in 3-4 degrees of warming.
28. See https:/ /www.ipcc.ch/sr15/38
What does this look like?
We will use innovative financial products to 
unlock good outcomes
Everything in this document will require 
investment – the estimate suggested as part of 
setting the WMCA Carbon Budget was 1-2 percent 
of GVA (roughly £2bn per year on average). How 
we create those investments matters: we want it 
to lower the cost of living, boost prosperity and 
to carry on recirculating through the places of the 
West Midlands.
Some of this will be about the levers of 
government: borrowing and taxation. But we can 
also work with financial institutions and investors 
to create products that unlock positive outcomes, 
whether it is a revolving loan for energy efficiency 
investment, a green bond to unlock sustainable 
urban drainage schemes or a co-operative share 
issue to deliver community-owned renewable 
energy system.
Case study - Climetrics
A green rating for pension funds
Climetrics provides an independent, holistic assessment of a pension fund’s 
climate-related risks and opportunities. It looks inside each fund, measuring 
its exposure to climate risks and opportunities, as well as the fund’s 
investment policy and the asset manager’s public action on climate change.
Climetrics ratings are free to search, providing investors with transparency on 
climate change-related risks when comparing funds. These sort of decision-
making tools are invaluable in helping institutional investors avoid ‘traps’ like 
stranded assets – investments that need to be written down or written off 
because they are not consistent with the future needs of society.39
Looking to the future - Fewer 
flights
Cleaner connectivity
The WMCA carbon budget does not include aviation. Nonetheless, it is useful 
to reflect on the tension between staying connected to the world around 
us and our climate change obligations. Globally, emissions from aviation 
can only grow by 25% if the sector is to deliver on the Paris Agreement – a 
challenge, given that most of the world’s population does not fly.
Facing this issue is likely to involve the following:
• Collective investment in international rail. 
• Collective investment in low carbon flight. 
• Frequent flyer levy: everyone gets one tax free return flight per year with a 
sliding levy scale for each subsequent flight. All returns to be invested into 
sustainable alternatives.  
40
Personal action - Becoming 
flexitarian
More variety, not less
Sometimes called ‘casual vegetarianism’, the spirit of flexitarian eating is 
one of inclusion: introducing more seasonal, plant-based options without 
completely eliminating meat. This has several advantages: 
• A reduction in greenhouse gas emissions – as much as 52 percent, 
assuming everyone switched to a flexitarian diet29. Other research 
indicates that if every family in the UK swapped a red meat meal to a 
plant-based meal just once a week, the environmental impact would be 
the same as taking 16 million cars off the road30.
• Reducing demand for meat would reduce the need for intensive animal 
farming, which has a negative impact on the environment. However, 
sustainable cattle farming has a role to play in reducing soil erosion by 
locking in nutrients and sequestering carbon emissions. 
• A healthy option with lower cholesterol and plenty of nutrition.
• It is more appealing to more people as it increases options for mealtimes. 
Furthermore, the meat eaten can be better quality, as people will have 
more budgetary headroom to eat meat that is organic and locally sourced.We will ensure that food is local, seasonal and with more plant-based 
options
We will create a region where it is easy to eat good food without adding to climate breakdown. This 
means eating meat like beef and lamb more sparingly and eating more seasonal food to ensure low 
food mileage and low production costs. Per person emissions associated with food are falling.
29. See https:/ /www.nature.com/articles/s41586-018-0594-0
30. Research commissioned by The Meatless Farm Company, see https:/ /meatlessfarm.com/meatless-consumption-target/41
We will ensure that there is no 
such thing as waste
Waste and pollution will be designed out of 
how we live our lives. We will keep products 
and materials in use, by reducing, reusing, and 
recycling the things we consume. We will see 
this as an opportunity to create new economic 
models, services and businesses, which will help 
us to achieve this.
Reduce
Reuse
Recycle
Recover
Dispose
Figure 7 – The waste hierarchy, indicating the 
order of preference for managing waste.
Case study - The ReUsers
Secondhand can be first choice
Located at Norris Way Household Recycling Centre in Sutton Coldfield, the 
ReUsers social enterprise (part of the Jericho Foundation) rescue unwanted 
items so that they can be resold to someone else at a fair price. They change 
their offer to meet local needs – for example, opening a Christmas shop to 
give people a cost-effective, sustainable alternative to buying new Christmas 
decorations. 
This sort of enterprise can be scaled up, to offer people a different shopping 
experience. Looking to Sweden, the ReTuna shopping centre – located on 
the outskirts of the small city of Eskilstuna – sells only reused and sustainably 
produced items31.
31. See: https:/ /bit.ly/2NA7TM242
Case study - EBRI
A regional centre for bioenergy expertise
The Energy and Bioproducts Research Institute (EBRI) at Aston University 
researches all aspects of bioenergy - an overview of which can be seen in 
Figure 8. 
It acts as a focus for international activities on the scientific and technological 
aspects of biomass conversion and utilisation of products for renewable 
power, heat, transport fuels, hydrogen and chemicals. EBRI works to extract 
the maximum value from all types of biomass, including waste resources. It 
also furnishes students with the skills and competencies they need to put 
their academic work into practice.
Figure 8 - An overview of EBRI's workAnaerobic Digestion (AD)
Optimising the AD process and 
utilising residues for further 
processing.
Bioenergy & Bioproduct 
market opportunities
Helping businesses develop 
new products and services from 
a wide range of waste materials.
Feedstock investigation
Testing and analysis of 
feedstocks for fuel production.
Torrefaction
Thermal pre-treatment of biomass to upgrade 
thermal-chemical properties.Vehicle-to-Grid
New communication and control platform for 
Vehicle-to-Grid/Building (V2G/V2B) systems.Algae Cultivation
Exploring the exploitation 
of microalgae for waste 
remidiation and bioenergy 
production.
Catalysis
Nanostructured catalyst 
systems for synthesis of biofuels 
and chemicals.
Gasification
Research and technology 
demonstration for gasification 
applications.Biochar
Testing and analysis of biochar 
for enhancing poor and high-
quality soils.
Combined Heat and Power 
(CHP) engines
Adaption of CHP engines 
(internal combustion engines) 
for bioenergy provision.
Pyrolysis
Research and technology 
demonstration for pyrolysis 
processes43
EXAMPLE ACTIONS
Changing our economy without leaving any of our communities behind
First five years Roll out citizen 
behaviour change 
campaigns with 
partners (energy, 
waste, travel)Work with other 
CAs to create 
climate change 
devolution 
frameworkDevelop a green 
bond to stimulate 
investment in 
low carbon 
infrastructurePublic sector work 
to procure food 
with a smaller 
climate impact
Ensure climate 
smart nutrition is 
embedded in the 
school curriculumExtend WMCA 
commitment to 
eliminate single-
use plastics from 
all activities by 
2020NHS regionally to 
create a climate 
action plan and 
target for its 
operationsWMCA to launch 
the first Clean 
Growth Challenge 
- demand-led 
innovation
Between five and 
fifteen yearsDivest the Local 
Government 
Pension Fund from 
fossil fuels, and 
into climate smart 
investmentEnsure that large 
infrastructure 
or service 
investments 
balance a carbon 
budgetRe-fresh the 
region’s SEP 
incorporating 
growth goals in 
line with climate 
ambitions 
The last five years No putrescible 
waste to be sent 
to landfill or 
incinerated
Decoupling prosperity from 
consumption: the first five years
• Balance carbon budgets on long term 
investments: collaborate so that large 
investments balance a carbon budget without 
offshoring emissions. This would signal serious 
intent.
• Devolution framework for climate:  
collaborate with the other combined 
authorities to develop a devolution framework 
and series of deals which relate to meeting the 
climate challenge. This should include new 
powers to generate revenue and to regulate.
• Create green financial products: work 
with financial institutions to design financial 
products like a ‘green bond’, to stimulate 
investment in the region and to boost local 
businesses. This could position the region 
to take real commercial advantage of the 
transition to low carbon economy that we will 
need to collectively embark on. • Factor climate impact into procurement: all 
catering contracts to take into account climate 
impact, including supply chain and freight. 
Collaborate to learn from what is easiest to 
measure and to build a supply chain of trusted 
local suppliers. 
• Embed climate smart eating into the 
curriculum: ensure that catering offer is 
complemented by embedding healthy eating 
in the curriculum. This can be as part of 
cooking classes that will also ensure children 
recognise a wide variety of seasonal foods. 
• Eliminate single-use plastics: work to 
eliminate single-use plastics from all activities. 
This is consistent with a pledge made by the 
Mayor in September 201932, which promises 
that single-use plastics will be eliminated from 
all WMCA/TfWM operations by the end of 
2020. 
32. See https:/ /www.wmca.org.uk/news/mayor-commits-west-midlands-combined-authority-to-ditching-single-use-plastics/44
• Build a case for the NHS contribution: to 
develop a plan for its contribution to various 
elements of the climate challenge: including 
single-use plastics, catering, waste, transport 
and estate. To be developed via collaboration 
between the integrated care systems (ICSs) of 
the WMCA 3-LEP area. 
Decoupling prosperity from 
consumption: between five and 
fifteen years
• Divestment of WM LGPF from fossil fuels: 
divest the West Midlands Local Government 
Pension Fund from fossil fuels and invest in 
renewable energy. Decoupling prosperity from 
consumption: the last five years
• No waste: no putrescible waste is sent to 
landfill or incinerated – it will be significantly 
reduced, with the remainder used in compost 
or anaerobic digestion.
Next steps: write our story
This paper is a first attempt at a WMCA position 
of what actions need to be taken in order to meet 
the climate challenge without leaving anyone 
behind. It is the storyboard, waiting for people 
across this region to bring it to life. Some of the 
actions are about doing things we already do 
differently. Some are already being developed and 
delivered as part of business as usual. Others will 
require new powers and investment.
Either way, we need to turn to the region’s 
people, businesses, Councils and community 
organisations, to give us a sense of whether 
we are in the right place. This will be part of an 
overarching campaign, ‘Let’s Talk 2041’, which 
everyone can participate in, championed by the 
Mayor Andy Street, the Environment Portfolio 
Holder, Councillor Ian Courts, and the wider 
leadership of the WMCA.  
To get you started, here are some key questions – 
but your responses can cover anything relevant:
1. Is anything missing: do the action areas 
provide the right impetus for change? Which 
policies, investments and changes do you 
think are the most important?
2. Barriers and opportunities: many people, 
places and businesses in this region have 
been pushing for action on climate change 
for a long time now, or have been quietly and diligently delivering that change. What 
do you see as the main barriers to meeting 
the climate change challenge, and which 
opportunities are too good to miss?
3. Accountability and governance: how do 
we ensure that we as a region do what is 
necessary to avert climate breakdown? 
Should WMCA and local councils have 
oversight of this, or do we need to create new 
partnerships?
4. Citizen involvement: people exercise their 
democratic rights at the ballot box, but there 
are many other ways for that to happen. 
Should we create a citizen’s assembly or 
similar, to shape and drive this work? Or are 
there better ways to involve people?
The responses to this paper, and Let’s Talk 2041 
will help us to create an investment programme to 
accompany this report. Now is the time to help us 
get this right.  
Email your thoughts, or offer to host a discussion 
with your organisation, place, or network: 
WM2041@wmca.org.uk. WMCA staff will provide 
you with a presentation and facilitation notes and 
will attend where possible.45
Appendix 1: Existing policies 
and asks
Existing Asks
Investment in Metro extension to Centenary 
Square, Wolverhampton City Centre and 
between Wednesbury and Brierley Hill.Investment in further extensions of the 
Metro, including from Birmingham to the HS2 
interchange at UK Central.
Pledge to end the use of single-use plastics by 
WMCA. Government backing for energy and clean air-
themed demand-led innovation challenges. 
Increased suburban rail capacity serving central 
Birmingham with 20,000 extra morning rush hour 
seats and more new carriages.Investment in our strategic cycle networks and 
high-profile engagement and behaviour change 
programmes inspired by Greater Manchester’s 
Beelines initiative
New suburban rail stations including stations at 
Moseley, Kings Heath, Hazelwell, Fort Parkway, 
Castle Bromwich, Darlaston and Willenhall.Deliver the regions mass transit network - new 
Tram and Bus Rapid Transit routes by 2026:  
Increased park and ride capacity for the West 
Midlands rail network, including expansion at 
Tipton, Sandwell and Dudley, Whitlocks End and 
Longbridge.Introducing new cleaner rail rolling stock through 
the West Midlands rail franchise.
Three new Bus Rapid Transit routes (‘Sprint’) by 
2022:
• Birmingham – Perry Barr –Walsall; 
• Birmingham - Solihull/Birmingham Airport; 
and 
• Birmingham – Langley/Peddimore – Sutton 
Coldfield.Partnership with Google to extend its 
Environmental Insights Explorer to the West 
Midlands.
Working with National Express and other 
operators to expand “low fare zones” to 
encourage increased bus ridership.Seeking ways to reduce air pollution from trains 
stopping and idling at central Birmingham 
stations, including making the case for national 
rail services stopping at central Birmingham to be 
run with non-diesel rolling stock.
Core bus corridor and central Birmingham bus 
priority improvements.Collective asks with other Metro Mayors for 
various ‘deals’ relating to mass transit, clean air, 
and energy
Upgrading bus fleet through retrofitting existing 
buses, new Euro VI buses and hydrogen powered 
buses, overseen through local Advanced Quality 
Partnership Schemes and the Bus Alliance.
UKBIC (Battery Industrialisation Centre) in 
Coventry.46
January 2020
This is a digital document. Please consider the environment before printing it.
