CLIMATE 
CHANGE
ACTION PLAN
Taking action for a net zero future
CONTENTS
This publication is available digitally and free to download from West Dunbartonshire Council website: 
https://www.west-dunbarton.gov.uk/council/strategies-plans-and-policies/council-wide-plans-
and-strategies/sustainable-development/climate-change/ 
Foreword 4
1 Context  5
  Vision 5
  About West Dunbartonshire 5
2 National and Regional Drivers  6
  The legal and policy drivers 6
  Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan 6
  Glasgow City Region - Climate Adaptation Strategy and Action Plan 7
3 Local Context 8
  Scope of Action Plan 8
  Opportunities and Challenges 8
  Integration 9
  Local Climate Change Risk and Vulnerability 9
  Strategic Environmental Assessment 10
4 Themes and Actions  12
  Actions 12  
  Overarching Actions 13
  Energy, Water & Assets 14
  Housing 15
  Waste & Circular Economy 16
  Sustainable Travel 17
  Sustainable Procurement 18
  Biodiversity, Greenspace & Landscape 19
  Climate Impacts, Risk & Adaptation 20
  Schools & Education 21
  Communities & Health 22
5 Delivery and Monitoring  23
  Governance 23
  Reviewing Progress 23CLIMATE CHANGE ACTION PLAN - TAKING ACTION FOR A NET ZERO FUTURE
I am delighted to introduce West Dunbartonshire’s 
new Climate Change Action Plan, which sets out 
the immediate and longer term actions the 
Council will need to take to respond to the 
climate emergency, both in relation to reducing 
Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emissions and adapting 
to the impacts of climate change up to 2045. 
It is vital that we take action now and play our 
part in the global effort to reduce the impacts 
of Climate Change. In April 2019, the Scottish 
Government declared a climate emergency, 
highlighting that serious changes in our society 
are needed to address this most urgent of 
issues. Furthermore, the latest report from the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) 
published in August 2021 highlights a ‘Code Red for 
Humanity’, confirming that it is indisputable that 
humans are warming our planet.The aim of this Action Plan is to build upon 
the existing environmental work the Council is 
undertaking, which has included looking at how 
we use and provide energy; encouraging our 
employees to be more environmentally friendly; 
developing biodiversity sites throughout the area 
and taking steps to manage and reduce the 
Council-wide carbon footprint. 
This new Climate Change Action Plan will 
implement our recently launched Climate 
Change Strategy through a series of actions 
for the short, medium and long term.
It will transform the way we operate as a 
Local Authority, integrating climate change 
mitigation, adaptation and sustainability 
measures into our operations as well as 
empowering our communities to take their own 
action to make change. It illustrates the initial 
steps we will take to reduce the environmental 
impacts and associated emissions from our own 
operations, and how we will transform the way 
we protect our community and infrastructure 
from the impacts of Climate Change. 
Furthermore, it demonstrates our commitment 
as a ‘major player’ for mitigating national carbon 
emissions by supporting the Scottish Government 
in meeting its ambitious climate change targets. 
I am confident that these commitments will allow 
us to continue to make progress on tackling climate 
change locally, while also supporting national and 
global efforts. I look forward to joining forces with 
our communities to see it progress.FOREWORD CONTEXT
Councillor Iain McLaren, 
Convener of Infrastructure, 
Regeneration and Economic DevelopmentVision
In January 2021, the Council launched a new 
Climate Change Strategy in response to the global 
climate emergency, setting a long term target for 
West Dunbartonshire becoming net zero by 2045, 
following a similar trajectory to the national target 
set for Scotland as a whole.
This Climate Change Action Plan sets out the 
immediate and longer term actions the Council 
will take to respond to the climate emergency, 
both in relation to mitigating and adapting to 
climate change. This plan will implement the 
Council’s Climate Change Strategy (2021) through 
a series of high-level actions for the short, 
medium and long term, setting out the need 
for action and a high level framework.
The proposed local actions set out in this Action 
Plan seek to build on national and regional level 
actions to tackle the climate emergency. These 
actions have been developed by the Council’s 
Climate Change Action Group in consultation 
with each of the Council’s service areas and 
have been subject to a Strategic Environmental 
Assessment (SEA) in accordance with the 
Environmental Assessment (Scotland) Act 2005. 
About West Dunbartonshire 
West Dunbartonshire Council is a Local Authority 
in the West of Scotland, sitting between Glasgow 
and the Loch Lomond & Trossachs national park and often considered the gateway to the Scottish
Highlands. With a population of just below 89,000 
and an area of 68 sq. miles, West Dunbartonshire 
is a small Council both in terms of population 
and land coverage. However, despite its size, 
West Dunbartonshire boasts a diverse range 
of land uses, natural and built resources, and a 
mix of dense urban form, rugged moorland and 
spectacular watercourses.  
The Council is responsible for provision of 
a range of services to its residents and citizens, 
which includes the collection of waste and 
recycling, the provision of schools and education, 
the management of planning and building 
standards, the provision of libraries, street 
lighting, and the collection of council taxes.  
In delivering these functions, the Council 
owns and operates a large built estate. 
As highlighted in our Climate Change Strategy, 
energy consumption from our buildings and 
operations are responsible for approximately 
44% of our carbon footprint; 47% of our overall 
footprint results from the waste and recycling 
of West Dunbartonshire (both operational 
and domestic household waste); and 9% 
from both council and staff vehicles and the 
operation of other equipment, such as grass 
cutters. The Council also has responsibility to 
ensure it is delivering on Climate Change 
targets in line with national Climate Change 
policy.01
BALLOCH
ALEXANDRIA
DUMB ARTON
CLYDEB ANKWEST DUNB ARTONSHIRE
WEST DUNB ARTONSHIRE
4 5CLIMATE CHANGE ACTION PLAN - TAKING ACTION FOR A NET ZERO FUTURE CLIMATE CHANGE ACTION PLAN - TAKING ACTION FOR A NET ZERO FUTURE
NATIONAL AND REGIONAL DRIVERS02
The legal and policy drivers
In a drive towards a low carbon economy, the 
Scottish Government set world leading Climate 
Change targets to reduce Scotland’s carbon 
emissions by 80% by 2050, with an interim 
reduction of 42% by 2020. In 2014 this interim 
target was met and exceeded (45.8%), originally 
leading to a new target set for a reduction of 50% 
for 2020. These targets present Scotland with 
significant social and economic opportunities, 
as well as challenges, and required a range of 
actions across society and the economy. The 
Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009, which details 
these targets, is regarded as one of the most 
ambitious Climate Change legislation in the world.
The Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009 places 
duties on all public bodies to contribute to 
emission reduction targets deliver programmes 
to increase resilience against Climate Change, 
and to act in a ‘Sustainable’ way. Under the act, 
the Council  is identified as a ‘Major Player’ due to 
its size and influence and therefore must submit 
a mandatory climate change report to Scottish 
Government (SG) on an annual basis, detailing the 
actions planned  to reduce our environmental 
impacts. These duties came into force in 2011, 
which led to the launch of the Council’s first 
Climate Change Strategy in 2012. 
Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan 
In January 2021, the Council launched a new 
overarching Climate Change Strategy, as a Route Map to reaching our national climate change 
targets. This project was commissioned in 
response to the Climate Emergency, announced 
by Scotland’s First Minister in 2019, followed by the 
‘Climate Change (Emissions Reduction Targets) 
(Scotland) Act 2019’, detailing new emission 
reduction targets for Scotland nationally:
• 56% reduction by 2020 
 (replacing the original 50% target);
• 75% reduction by 2030;
• 90% reduction by 2040; and
• ‘Net Zero’ emissions by 2045.
The commissioning of the project aligned with 
the renewal of the Council’s Energy Strategy and 
Carbon Management Plan, providing an ideal 
opportunity to integrate all documents into one 
Climate Change Strategy. Whilst the climate 
emergency has focused minds and the scale 
of change required is now greater, climate action 
isn’t a wholly new project for the Council, 
particularly because of the previous Climate 
Change documents as previously mentioned.
The Council’s Climate Change Action Group was 
also relaunched. This provided an opportunity to 
invite new members from all internal service 
areas, ensuring that climate change responsibilities 
could be devolved to service areas to better deliver 
climate action across the Council to successfully 
achieve our 2045 net zero target.
Whilst the Climate Change Strategy provides a 
route map on how the Council intends to achieve 
net zero emissions by 2045, this Climate Change Action Plan provides detailed actions on how 
we will deliver and monitor our Climate Change 
efforts to make West Dunbartonshire net zero 
by 2045.  
This scope of the plan focuses on:
• Mitigation  - reduction of public and operational  
 greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions (principally  
 carbon dioxide); 
• Adaptation  - understand, evaluate and 
 respond to climate risks and the impacts of   
 climate-related hazards in our local area;  and 
• Sustainability  – wider actions to improve 
 environmental, social and economic outcomes  
 to meet our own needs without compromising  
 the ability of future generations to meet their  
 needs. This includes sustainable use of natural  
 resources and action to improve the quality of  
 the natural environment. 
Delivery of this Action Plan will require wider 
engagement with the staff and public on 
environmental challenges. The Council wants 
to encourage and drive wider climate action 
across our organisation (internally) and West 
Dunbartonshire (externally), including (but not 
limited to) community groups, businesses, 
landowners, infrastructure, the wider public 
and other necessary stakeholders. 
The actions in this plan have been arranged 
under 9 key themes (including 1 ‘overarching’ 
theme) as defined in the Climate Change Strategy. 
An additional theme was identified through the 
Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA), 
which details actions that are ‘overarching’ across 
West Dunbartonshire, bringing the total amount 
of themes up to 10. These thematic actions are 
cross-cutting and will involve multiple council 
service areas, sharing the responsibilities of 
climate action across Council operations. 
Some actions are designed to inform and 
help shape the development of other relevant 
Council plans and strategies to address climate 
risks. 
Detailed information regarding how the 
Council plan’s to prioritise, monitor and deliver 
these actions is set out later in this document.Glasgow City Region - Climate 
Adaptation Strategy and Action Plan
Climate Ready Clyde (CRC) is a cross-sector 
initiative funded by the Scottish Government and 
15 member organisations to create a shared vision, 
strategy and action plan for an adapting Glasgow 
City Region (GCR). The Council is a key member of 
this initiative and assists in the development and 
delivery of relevant Adaptation action across the 
Glasgow City Region.
Climate Ready Clyde developed the first Climate 
Adaptation Strategy & Action Plan for the GCR and 
was launched in June 2021, informing the ‘Climate 
Impacts, Risk & Adaptation’ theme in this action 
plan.
 
The GCR Climate Adaptation Strategy sets out a 
regional approach seeking to ensure that Glasgow 
City Region’s economy, society and environment 
is not only prepared for, but continues to flourish 
in the face of the impacts arising from the climate 
crisis. In this context, the strategy:
• Outlines the processes and early interventions  
 needed to manage climate risks and realise   
 opportunities;
• Provides a strategic framework for 
 Adaptation in and by the Glasgow City Region  
 that fits alongside and supports key plans,   
 policies and activities to enable delivery;
• Sets out how we will deepen and expand   
 collaboration and collective impact by   
 working together and engaging, equipping 
 and enabling citizens and organizations to 
 play a role in realising the vision; and
• Sets out how progress in increasing climate  
 resilience will be monitored, evaluated and   
 learnt from to improve policies, strategies,   
 programmes and projects.
The strategy is supported by an Action Plan which 
defines key actions being taken across the City 
Region between 2020 and 2025, as well as longer 
term actions. This regional level strategy provides 
a clear foundation by identifying priorities and 
flagship Adaptation actions, which have informed 
the development of our local level action plan and 
which our plan will help to implement.
6 7CLIMATE CHANGE ACTION PLAN - TAKING ACTION FOR A NET ZERO FUTURE CLIMATE CHANGE ACTION PLAN - TAKING ACTION FOR A NET ZERO FUTURE
LOCAL CONTEXT03
Scope of Action Plan
The scope of this Climate Change Action Plan 
covers mitigation, Adaptation and sustainability 
actions (as defined by the Climate Change (Scot -
land) Act 2009), addressing both:
• The Council’s ‘internal’ impacts and 
 performance - emissions and Adaptation 
 risks associated with the delivery of Council  
 services, and the achievement of the emissions  
 reduction target set out in the Council’s Climate  
 Change Strategy; and
• Wider ‘external’ impacts which are influenced  
 but not directly controlled by the Council -   
 emissions, climate risks and wider sustainability  
 issues affecting communities, businesses and  
 the environment across West Dunbartonshire.  
The proposed actions set out in this Action Plan 
have been developed and agreed by the Climate 
Change Action Group in consultation with all 
service areas of the Council.
The Council’s cross-service Climate Change 
Action Group will monitor the implementation 
of this Action Plan and lead the development of 
future plans, which may include accounting for 
‘external’ emissions. This would need to account 
for factors including the local socio-economic 
context for West Dunbartonshire, as well as 
several challenges that may limit delivery of 
Climate Change action at a local level.
It is important that the Council involves local 
residents in our collective journey to net zero, ensuring that continued community engagement 
with local groups and residents empowers them to 
take action for our environment.
Opportunities and Challenges
The preparation of this Action Plan has been 
informed by a review of opportunities and 
challenges which both influence and limit the 
ability to deliver local climate action (mitigation 
and Adaptation). Identified challenges include 
(but are not limited to):
• Funding availability  – delivery of many 
 actions will require resources, capital works  
 and investment by the Council – e.g. enhanced  
 energy efficiency measures, and heating and  
 renewables projects in both domestic and   
 non-domestic building assets.
• Funding approach  – a combination of internal  
 and external funding sources will be needed to  
 deliver climate action at scale. Short term 
 funding mechanisms such as annual payback  
 of Council expenditure presents difficulties for  
 delivering long term projects. Climate Change  
 investments also need to take account of   
 whole-life costs including reduced 
 maintenance costs and avoided Adaptation   
 costs.
• Internal capacity  – limited staff time and 
 availability, largely due to reduced Council   
 budgets, further impacted by Covid19.
• Skills  – requirement to upskill and train 
 existing staff or source new staff and/or 
 consultancies with more in-depth specialised   experience of Climate Change projects.
• Communication  – both internally (to avoid ‘silo’  
 working) and externally (engaging with the   
 public and keeping abreast of local/national/ 
 international changes to policy).
• Economics  – some technologies, materials   
 and skills are still very expensive so innovation  
 must progress to enhance the viability
 of climate actions within the context of 
 the Council’s budget constraints.
• Strategy and planning  – all existing and future  
 Council plans should place responding to the  
 climate emergency at their core and ensure  
 integration with other Council services.
• Legislation & Regulatory  – the ability to   
 implement some climate actions is constrained  
 at the local level by minimum standards and  
 other restrictions set through legislation and  
 national policy, for example in relation to 
 building regulations and procurement.
• Public attitudes and behaviours  - Changing 
 behaviour of residents, businesses and 
 stakeholders positively and proactively, 
 especially where there are cost implications 
 to the delivery of climate actions.
Integration
The preparation of this Action Plan has been 
informed by relevant existing and emerging 
plans including the Scottish Government’s 
Climate Change Plan 2018 – 2032 (updated 2020), 
Adaptation Scotland’s Adaptation Capability 
Framework and the Glasgow City Region 
Adaptation Strategy and Action Plan. Other 
relevant plans include national planning and 
energy policies alongside the Council’s Local 
Development Plan and delivery plans prepared 
by each of the Council’s service areas. 
This Action Plan is therefore designed to 
integrate with all relevant existing and emerging 
national, regional and local plans and strategies, 
both in terms of aligning with and informing the 
preparation of other plans. At a local level, other 
plans prepared by the Council will also influence 
the delivery of individual actions identified in this 
Action Plan, including in terms of their resourcing, 
phasing and monitoring. Local Climate Change Risk 
and Vulnerability 
The effects of climate change (climate risk) are 
not experienced equally around the globe as the 
probability of a climate related event occurring 
(such as flooding or temperature rise) is dependant 
on several factors. The impact of an event 
occurring is also affected by vulnerability (the 
degree to which assets, buildings or communities 
will be affected by hazards due to their exposure, 
sensitivity, and adaptive capacity). Climate risk 
is therefore not the same in every town or city 
around the world. The probability of specific 
hazards occurring, and the level of vulnerability 
(as well as capacity to act) are important factors 
when considering the risks which climate 
change poses to West Dunbartonshire, including 
specifically risks to the future delivery of the 
Council’s services.
The West Dunbartonshire Climate Change Strategy 
(2021) provides detailed information regarding the 
Council’s carbon emissions footprint, which has 
been used to develop targeted mitigation actions 
as detailed within this Action Plan. To provide 
a similar evidence base for Adaptation actions 
and to ensure that climate risks to the delivery of 
Council services are identified and addressed, 
this Action Plan includes a commitment that the 
Council will undertake a local climate change risk 
and vulnerability assessment (CCRVA), with the 
outcomes used to shape the development of 
future Adaptation actions. 
A CCRVA1 has been conducted for the wider 
Glasgow area to inform the first Climate 
Adaptation Strategy for the GCR. Whilst the 
Strategy identifies relevant priorities and 
Flagship Actions which have informed this 
Action Plan, the regional framing of the 
document precludes detailed consideration 
of local risks within West Dunbartonshire. 
This Action Plan therefore commits the 
Council to undertaking a local Climate Risk 
and Vulnerability Assessment in order to assess 
climate risks to the future delivery of services, 
inform the implementation of actions detailed 
in this Action Plan and support the development 
of further actions. 
8 9CLIMATE CHANGE ACTION PLAN - TAKING ACTION FOR A NET ZERO FUTURE
To inform a local level CCRVA the Council will 
use data from CRC, Adaptation Scotland, SEPA, 
the Met Office and other relevant sources to 
develop a geographical approach to understand 
high risk-areas and assess specific impacts on the 
delivery of Council services. The assessment will 
also consider the Council’s capacity and identify 
areas for improvement to act by benchmarking 
against Adaptation Scotland’s Adaptation 
Capability Framework. Once completed, this 
assessment will support the development of 
a live climate risk register which will allow 
the Council to be proactive in developing and 
delivering locally appropriate mitigation and 
Adaptation actions based on identified 
opportunities, risks and vulnerabilities. 
The climate risk register will be monitored by 
the Council’s Climate Change Action Group in 
response to internal and external developments.Strategic Environmental Assessment
All proposed actions have been refined and tested 
as part of a Strategic Environmental Assessment 
(SEA) carried out on the emerging Action Plan in 
accordance with the Environmental Assessment 
(Scotland) Act 2005. The SEA process has been 
used as a plan-making tool to inform the Action 
Plan, rather than simply being a statutory 
reporting exercise. This has allowed the 
environmental, social and economic implications 
of all proposed actions to be tested at the 
earliest opportunity and for any uncertainties, 
issues or mitigation requirements identified 
during the impact assessment process to be 
addressed during plan preparation. In addition to 
meeting statutory requirements, this process has 
helped to maximise the performance of and more 
generally improve the quality of the Action Plan. 
The draft Action Plan was published for 
consultation for the SEA governing bodies 
and wider public to respond, alongside a SEA 
Environmental Report in 2021. This demonstrated 
how the SEA process informed the development 
of the Action Plan, including the incorporation 
of recommended changes within the document 
prior to publication. As a result, the Environmental 
Report concluded there is good coverage of all key 
environmental issues in the Action Plan and that 
the suite of proposed actions are appropriate and 
likely to be effective in responding to the climate 
emergency at a local level.
1 A CCRVA is a tool that can be used to evaluate climate 
related hazards specifically in a local area. This can then 
assess the local level of risk and vulnerability, in order to 
identify suitable mitigation/adaptation measures.
10 11CLIMATE CHANGE ACTION PLAN - TAKING ACTION FOR A NET ZERO FUTURE CLIMATE CHANGE ACTION PLAN - TAKING ACTION FOR A NET ZERO FUTURE
10 key themes have been identified to address climate change for West Dunbartonshire.
Actions
Under each key theme the Council has identified a suite of actions with engagement and input 
from a wide range of internal service areas. Each action is summarised in the following tables.
A limited set of Priority Actions are set out under each theme (highlighted in green ); these 
represent actions which are considered essential to the achievement of targets specified in the 
Council’s Climate Strategy and are planned for delivery within the first 3 years of the Action Plan’s 
lifetime (post approval). A wider set of proposed longer term actions which are intended to be 
commenced within the full 5-year lifetime of this Action Plan, and where appropriate may be 
further developed or carried forward into the Council’s next Action Plan, are also identified.  
If you require a more detailed breakdown of how these actions will be delivered then 
please refer to the appendix at the end of the action plan.Overarching Actions
• The Council will be ‘net-zero’ by 2045, with interim carbon reduction 
 targets of 61% by 2030-31 and 87% by 2040-41.
 *‘net zero’ - a state of balance between emissions and emission reductions 
 (physical removal of emissions from atmosphere).
• Where the complete reduction or avoidance of emissions are not achievable, adopt a responsible 
 approach to carbon offsetting initiatives where necessary to address residual unavoidable 
 emissions. Ensure that the chosen scheme is to a ‘Woodland Carbon Code’ standard or similar.
• Develop a proactive and responsive Green Champions network across the organisation to 
 empower staff and respond to the targets and actions set by the Climate Change Action Group.
• Ensure energy and carbon management objectives are mainstreamed within the 
 Council’s strategic and operational decision-making.THEMES AND ACTIONS04
12 13
reduction
reduction of emissions by
28,719 tCO2e
reduction
reduction of emissions by
20,235 tCO2eInterim target by 2030/31 Interim target by 2040/41
by 2045/46
 CARBON NEUTRALCARBON NEUTRALClimate Impacts, 
Risk & AdaptationSchools
& EducationCommunities
& HealthBiodiversity, Landscape
& GreenspaceSustainable
ProcurementSustainable
TravelEnergy &
Water & AssetsWaste &
Circular EconomyHousing
Overarching
Actions
THEMESCLIMATE CHANGE ACTION PLAN - TAKING ACTION FOR A NET ZERO FUTURE
Energy, Water & Assets
The Council will continue to take action to reduce energy consumption and improve energy and water 
efficiency in our buildings and across our operations. We will also take into account the rationalisation and 
improved utilisation of our offices, depots and other buildings, ensuring that we respond adequately to the 
green recovery of the Covid19 pandemic and futureproofing our assets for net zero.   
The Council has also developed a pilot Local Heat and Energy Efficiency Strategy (LHEES) and report to 
improve our efforts, which will set the strategy and framework for reducing energy demand and decarbonising 
the heat supply in the Clydebank area and Queens Quay heat network. 
The LHEES aims to establish area-based plans and priorities for improving the energy efficiency of buildings, 
and decarbonising heat. These will then be developed and expanded to other areas across West Dunbarton -
shire, a first step in the developing and adopting a wider 20 year strategy that will strive towards achieving 
net zero emissions from buildings by 2045, and removing poor energy efficiency as a driver for fuel poverty.
• Set a new annual reduction target for all energy consumption in our Council buildings, 
 which exceeds the Council’s current target.
• Deliver recommendations identified through the Council’s pilot Local Heat and Energy Efficiency 
 Strategy (LHEES)*, which will set the strategy and framework for reducing energy demand and 
 decarbonising the heat supply of buildings in the proposed Clydebank area. This will underpin the 
 Council’s approach to energy efficiency going forward.
 * For more information on our LHEES for Clydebank, please refer to our Climate Change 
 Strategy and supporting report.
• Develop further LHEES for all areas of West Dunbartonshire - in line with mandatory 
 requirements from Scottish Government.
• Develop and implement a Council energy reduction strategy for Council buildings.
• Develop and implement a Council water consumption reduction strategy for Council buildings.
• Review the Council’s estate to explore the full potential for installation of renewable energy technologies.  
 Where feasible and cost effective, accelerate the implementation of renewables projects.
• Develop and implement a Renewable Energy Strategy.
• Where feasible and cost effective, the Council will continue to optimise the use of existing assets and  
 buildings, prioritising building retrofit, adaptation, re-use and maintenance over new construction.Housing
The Council will continue to reduce energy consumption and improve energy efficiency in our social 
housing and fuel poor households, ensuring fuel poverty and the decarbonisation of housing are key to 
achieving a net zero carbon future.
This will require the implementation of further energy efficiency improvements to all existing domestic 
council stock and future developments, whilst minimising overheating risks and ensuring future resilience 
to the impacts of climate change.
• Continue to improve energy efficiency in social housing. Identify and implement further energy 
 efficiency improvements to existing domestic council stock and future developments, whilst 
 minimising overheating risks.
• Where feasible, we will consider options to retrofit, renovate and maintain existing domestic 
 buildings over the construction of new buildings and developments.
• Where feasible and cost effective, implement domestic building sustainability, energy efficiency 
 or design standards which go beyond standard mandatory regulations. In all decisions and practices 
 the Council will encourage housing delivery (both Council led and external) to demonstrably contribute  
 to the achievement of net zero emissions by 2045.
• Identify and test a holistic housing project to tackle fuel poverty and climate change in tandem 
 using alternative fuel sources (e.g. Solar Panels). This pilot will help inform the approach to  
 domestic housing across West Dunbartonshire.CLIMATE CHANGE ACTION PLAN - TAKING ACTION FOR A NET ZERO FUTURE
14 15CLIMATE CHANGE ACTION PLAN - TAKING ACTION FOR A NET ZERO FUTURE CLIMATE CHANGE ACTION PLAN - TAKING ACTION FOR A NET ZERO FUTURE
Waste & Circular Economy
The Council will take action to manage waste sustainably by reducing, reusing, recycling and recovering 
waste to improve resource efficiency whilst working towards a circular economy.
A circular economy is part of the solution to our global climate emergency - one in which products, 
services and systems are designed to maximise their value and minimise waste. It’s an all-encompassing 
approach to life and business, where everything has value and nothing is wasted (Zero Waste Scotland, 
2016).
Transitioning to a Circular Economy and enhancing resource efficiency is very important to mitigating 
against Climate Change, as reducing the amount of packaging we use and the avoidance of all waste 
going to landfill greatly reduces Greenhouse Gas emissions going into the atmosphere, particularly from 
Methane (CH4) which emits from landfills/dumps and is much more potent than Carbon Dioxide (CO2).
Action must also be taken on waste from domestic households, researching ways to transition to a zero 
waste and circular economy by supporting national efforts to eradicate waste to landfill.
• Implement and monitor a new Circular Economy and Waste Reduction Strategy for West 
 Dunbartonshire - detailing how the Council will help reduce, reuse and recycle, detailing corporate   
 standards, targets and staff guidance for our waste activities, including improving infrastructure.
• Develop a new Materials/Resources Transfer Station for West Dunbartonshire.
• Research and implement alternative and/or innovative waste recycling and circular 
 economy facilities and projects, e.g. for Anaerobic Digestion (AD) and similar technologies.
• Undertake a review and implement recommendations (where feasible) to further reduce food 
 waste and food miles in all council buildings and schools. 
• For procurement activities under £50k, ensure no single-use plastics (SUP) items are purchased 
 or used within Council schools and buildings, and where feasible, purchase more sustainable 
 alternatives or adapt behaviours to reduce the need for these options.
• All WDC staffed sites to include waste segregation facilities at source (where feasible), encouraging  
 staff towards recycling and circular economy practices by providing the required infrastructure and  
 signage.Sustainable Travel
The Council will take action to encourage active travel through walking, cycling and public transport and 
deploy sustainable alternatives to decarbonise transport for both the public and for the Council.
• Expand Electric Vehicle (EV) charging points and infrastructure across the Council estate - 
 where feasible.
• Expand Electric Vehicle (EV) charging points and infrastructure across West Dunbartonshire - 
 where feasible.
• Consolidate and reduce the Council’s pool fleet, ensuring that remaining fossil fuel fleet are 
 replaced with Ultra-Low Emission Vehicles (ULEVs) or Zero Emission Vehicles (ZEVs) where 
 technically feasible.
• Adopt and take action to implement Sustainable people, places and connections, for both 
 WDC staff and for communities across West Dunbartonshire.
• Expand Cycle Friendly Employer (CFE) assessments to more sites and support increased 
 infrastructure whilst improving access to, and availability of, pool bikes, electric bikes and 
 associated schemes for staff.
• Expand and improve ICT software and technologies to enable staff to enable agile working 
 to reduce staff commuting and associated environmental impacts.
16 17CLIMATE CHANGE ACTION PLAN - TAKING ACTION FOR A NET ZERO FUTURE CLIMATE CHANGE ACTION PLAN - TAKING ACTION FOR A NET ZERO FUTURE
Sustainable Procurement
The Council will take action to meet the needs for goods, services, works and utilities in a way that 
achieves value for money on a whole life basis in terms of reducing carbon emissions, generating benefits 
for society and the economy and minimising damage to the environment. However, action in this area 
at the local level is limited as it is dependent on effective statutory provisions, policies and guidance 
at the national level to support the Council (and other Public Bodies) in implementing sustainable 
procurement practices.
With this in mind, the Council will adhere to existing Scottish Government guidance, legislation and 
procurement practices such as the Scottish Sustainable Procurement Action Plan, Sustainable 
Procurement Guidance and the Procurement Reform (Scotland) Act 2014. Where feasible and cost 
effective, the Council will make efforts to go beyond this and drive further sustainability benefits from 
procurement practices. 
• Develop Sustainability Procurement guidance and promote their implementation throughout 
 the Council.
• Develop a pilot to review a supply chain stream or procurement exercise for goods or services 
 or contracts/tenders, reviewing overall carbon emissions and environmental impacts from 
 cradle to grave. 
• Promote a sustainable approach to procurement of appliances and equipment based on 
 energy efficiency and wider sustainability credentials rather than solely cost.Biodiversity, Greenspace & Landscape
The Council recognises the impact of climate change on biodiversity and will make efforts to conserve 
and enhance biodiversity across a range of habitats and provide health and wellbeing benefits for all 
residents and reduce our environmental impacts.
This means the Council needs to embed biodiversity and landscape management into organisational 
targets by ensuring that it is considered in all appropriate decision-making.  Biodiversity, Greenspace 
and Landscape, like any other climate change interventions, should be integrated into what the council 
does both operationally and through positive behaviours.
This approach will aid in the development of more resilient greenspaces and infrastructure for the both 
the Council and the wider public, improving Adaptation practices and ensuring Adaptation measures 
protect greenspaces and infrastructure against the impacts of Climate Change.
• Approve and implement LDP2 Green Network and Green Infrastructure planning guidance, 
 including reviewing further opportunities for green infrastructure improvement. This will be 
 informed by engagement with relevant consultees including NatureScot.
• Analyse the habitat and sequestration benefits of existing trees and flora across the West 
 Dunbartonshire area to better understand how the Council (with partners) can increase 
 Greenhouse Gas (GHG) sequestration 
• Develop a new Local Biodiversity Action Plan (LBAP), including initiatives to support Climate 
 Change mitigation, Adaptation and sustainability across West Dunbartonshire.
• Review vacant brownfield and greenfield sites to identify their potential to adopt a green 
 infrastructure first approach and/or integrate nature based solutions (where appropriate) 
 in order to limit the impacts of land Use Change (LUC).
18 19
CLIMATE CHANGE ACTION PLAN - TAKING ACTION FOR A NET ZERO FUTURE CLIMATE CHANGE ACTION PLAN - TAKING ACTION FOR A NET ZERO FUTURE
20 21Climate Impacts, Risk & Adaptation
The council will make our communities, green networks and infrastructure more adaptable to a changing 
climate and reduce the risks and vulnerability to unavoidable impacts.
• With support from Climate Ready Clyde (CRC) and wider Glasgow City region (GCR), deliver 
 flagship actions as highlighted in the GCR Adaptation Strategy, where feasible and relevant.
• The Council undertake an internal Climate Risk and Vulnerability Assessment to both shape the   
 implementation of high level actions defined in this action plan and inform the development of 
 further climate action (i.e. the next action plan).
• Benchmark the Council against Adaptation Scotland’s Adaptation Capability Framework to 
 identify current position and areas for improvement.Schools & Education
The council will work more closely with schools and Council staff to better consider the environment 
and Climate Change in all operations; to act in a Sustainable way; and to educate and empower pupils to 
take action on Climate Change to influence future generations.
• Ensure all schools achieve Eco-Schools Green Flag status by 2025.  Increase participation in 
 the Eco Schools programme via improved local support and pilot projects with appointed schools.
• Climate Change and Sustainability embedded into staff continued personal development 
 (CPD) plans, ensuring that mandatory learning is implemented for all new and existing staff.  
 This will also involve training for Councillors and senior officers.
• Review gaps in staff knowledge on Climate Change and develop training sessions for staff 
 to encourage net zero behaviours.
CLIMATE CHANGE ACTION PLAN - TAKING ACTION FOR A NET ZERO FUTURE CLIMATE CHANGE ACTION PLAN - TAKING ACTION FOR A NET ZERO FUTURE
22 23Communities & Health
The Council will take action through positive engagement with equality groups and the wider community, 
including (but not limited to) local businesses and health & social care partnerships. This will be achieved 
through engagement with, and empowerment of, the wider public across West Dunbartonshire.
Better understanding the impacts of Climate Change and extreme weather events on the personal 
health will help to stress the need for supporting residents through improving building fabric and improving 
local air quality, etc.
Community engagement will include the development of a Climate Change community forum to have a 
more proactive engaged discussion with the local community and equality groups, etc. This can be used 
to inform action and for the Council to understand what local residents want relating to climate action.  
The engagement with community is an important part of supporting local residents to help achieve a 
better local environment and net zero future.
• Develop a Climate Change Community Forum to underpin more proactive and engaged 
 discussions with and climate actions by the local community. 
• Support West Dunbartonshire businesses in becoming carbon neutral and climate resilient.
DELIVERY AND MONITORING05
Governance
Successful implementation of the Climate Change 
Action Plan will require internal governance at 
strategic and operational levels. Much like the 
Council’s Climate Change Strategy, this Action 
Plan is a cross-service document that sets out 
shared responsibilities, with specific actions 
being owned by a relevant lead service area and 
implementation supported by other relevant 
service areas. The Climate Change Action Group 
was launched to ensure delivery, being led by the 
Council’s SustainabilityTeam and involving senior 
management from each of the Council’s service 
areas, ensuring shared responsibility of climate 
targets and objectives for their own service areas. 
The Climate Change Action Group will be accountable 
for the operational delivery of this Action Plan.  
This group will measure progress by each service 
and will ensure climate change targets and objectives 
are being met. These will be measured annually 
through the Council’s internal performance system 
to ensure ownership, and to delegate responsibility 
across service areas. In turn the Climate Change 
Action Group will report to a senior governance 
board on an annual basis, ensuring both service 
leaders and relevant staff are delivering on climate 
action effectively.
The long term nature of this Action Plan allows time 
to deliver a range of climate mitigation, climate 
Adaptation and wider sustainability actions up to 
2045. Deliverables can be amended or revised 
periodically as national or international climate 
change measures change, with actions being 
allocated accordingly.  Reviewing Progress
It is essential that all Council service areas play 
their part in implementing this Action Plan, which 
has been co-produced with involvement from all 
services. The implementation of the Action Plan 
will be tracked through quarterly meetings of the 
Council’s Climate Change Action Group and 
reviewed annually, with additional targets and 
implementation details developed if necessary.  
Every 5 years the Action Plan will be subject to a 
full review, resulting in the preparation of an 
updated Action Plan.
In accordance with statutory requirements a 
monitoring framework will be prepared as part 
of the to provide a mechanism to confirm the 
effectiveness of delivering individual actions as 
set out in the Action Plan, and to identify 
associated environmental effects. The monitoring 
framework will also further specify delivery 
mechanisms associated with individual actions 
and to review the overall implementation of the 
Action Plan. 
The role of the Council’s Sustainability Team is to coordinate, 
stimulate and motivate Climate Change action across all 
service areas and functions.Appendix 1 - Detailed Action Tables
Each thematic table is broken down into the following headings to illustrate how we intend to deliver 
climate change related actions to achieve net zero greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by 2045.
∙  ACTION - the Climate Change action identified for delivery. 
∙  SCOPE - this identifies the parameters of each action to enable the action to be understood and implemented as intended. 
  Scope details include key parameters, boundaries and task breakdown (high-level).  It provides detail explaining what each action 
  is and how it will be implemented.
∙  TIMESCALE - proposed timescale of action and breakdown of stages (if action is multi-stage).
∙  FOCUS - if the action is internally or externally focussed, or both. Is it mitigation, adaptation or sustainability driven? 
∙  SERVICE LEAD and SUPPORTING SERVICE AREAS - i) Council service area leading on action and 
  ii) Other relevant service areas/departments who need to be involved in implementation.
∙  STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT - list other relevant stakeholders (non-Council services).
  
∙  RESOURCING - funding or other resourcing  (e.g. staff)  requirements.  
∙  MONITORING - relationship between each action and the Climate Change Strategy. 
  Defined indicators for monitoring framework to track progress and success.
Priority Actions are set out under each theme ( highlighted in green ); these represent actions which are considered essential to the achievement of targets 
specified in the Council’s Climate Strategy and are planned for delivery within the first 3 years of the Action Plan’s lifetime (post approval). A wider set of proposed 
longer term actions which are intended to be commenced within the full 5-year lifetime of this Action Plan.Action Scope Timescale Focus Service Lead and 
Supporting Service 
AreasStakeholder 
EngagementResourcing Monitoring
Set a new annual reduction 
target for all energy 
consumption in our Council 
buildings, which exceeds the 
Council’s current target.The Energy & Compliance team will review existing internal 
energy target and agree what target could be realistically 
achieved, where feasible and cost effective.
Building on the Council’s existing spend-to-save approach, 
the Council will use Monitoring & Targeting (M&T) on buildings 
and assets with irregular energy consumption and patterns.  
This will inform the development of a new energy reduction 
target based on our current baseline which was reset by the 
Climate Change Strategy.
This will be directly influenced by new working environments 
and patterns as a result (at least in part) of the Covid19 
pandemic - such as the consolidation of buildings, staff remote 
working, and requirements for staff to change their behaviours 
to support the transition to net zero, etc.
Ensure that this target is focussed on all service areas, 
and to highlight that this is not the sole responsibility of the 
Energy & Compliance team.2021 - 2026
(Long-term 
target of 2045)Corporate Energy & Compliance
Asset Management; 
Organisation WideScottish Energy 
Officers Network (SEON)
Scottish GovernmentCouncil Capital
Council Revenue
Scottish Government 
funding: LCITP; GGA
Energy Savings Trust 
(EST)
SALIXCurrently monitored on an annual basis 
alongside carbon reduction targets - this is 
reported to Scottish Government through 
mandatory climate change reporting.
Monthly Monitoring & Targeting (M&T) 
of high energy consumers to inform decision 
making.
Scottish Government Targets:
Phase out the installation of all new gas 
boilers by 2035 at the latest.
Deliver recommendations 
identified through the Council’s   
pilot Local Heat and Energy 
Efficiency Strategy (LHEES)*, 
which will set the strategy and 
framework for reducing energy 
demand and decarbonising the 
heat supply of buildings in the 
proposed Clydebank area.  
This will underpin the Council’s 
approach to energy efficiency 
going forward.
* For more information on our 
LHEES for Clydebank, please 
refer to our Climate Change 
Strategy and supporting report.Utilise traffic lighting approach recommended as part of the 
LHEES.  
Use this to identify additional connections to the DHN, to make 
energy efficiency improvements and tackle fuel poverty.
Recommendations of the LHEES will then help develop the 
scope, criteria and approach for Clydebank and it’s assets.
From results of the pilot LHEES, and with advice from 
Scottish Government, will develop LHEES for all areas of 
West Dunbartonshire - in line with mandatory requirements. 
Approach and scale may change depending on lessons learned 
and the outcome of our pilot approach.  2021 - 2026
(Long-term 
target of 2045)Corporate; 
Wider 
CommunityEnergy & Compliance; Asset 
Management; Housing
Planning; Regeneration; DLO; 
Education; GIS; 
Organisation WideScottish Energy 
Officers Network 
(SEON);
Scottish Government
Local communityCouncil Capital
Scottish Government 
funding: LCITP; GGA; 
HEEPS:ABS; EESSH
SALIXWill be monitored and reviewed by Climate 
Change Action Group on a regular basis and 
our internal risk management system.
Report to Scottish Government on an annual 
basis through mandatory climate change 
reporting.
Scottish Government will make the 
development of LHEES’s mandatory for 
Local Authorities in 2023.  There will be a 
resourcing/funding expectation for Council’s 
to achieve significant energy savings.
Scottish Government Targets:
Phase out the installation of all new gas 
boilers by 2035 at the latest.  
By 2024, all new homes consented are to 
use zero emission heating.Energy, Water & AssetsCLIMATE CHANGE ACTION PLAN - TAKING ACTION FOR A NET ZERO FUTUREAction Scope Timescale Focus Service Lead and 
Supporting Service 
AreasStakeholder 
EngagementResourcing Monitoring
Develop further LHEES 
for all areas of West 
Dunbartonshire - in line with 
mandatory requirements from 
Scottish Government.After the initial LHEES for Clydebank, the Council will identify 
future areas based on their levels of fuel poverty and the level 
of requirement needed for energy efficiency and renewable 
energy interventions.
The parameters/criteria of what is required will be identified 
based on the specific needs and requirements of each area 
(yet to be identified), including the renewables needed to heat 
and power domestic and non-domestic buildings.2023 - 2045 Corporate; 
Wider 
CommunityEnergy & Compliance; 
Asset Management; Housing
Planning; Regeneration; 
DLO; Education; GIS; 
Organisation WideScottish Energy Officers 
Network (SEON)
Scottish Government
Vital EnergiCouncil Capital;
Scottish Government 
funding: LCITP; GGA; 
HEEPS:ABS; EESSH
SALIXWill be monitored and reviewed by 
Climate Change Action Group on a regular 
basis and our internal risk management 
system.
Report to Scottish Government on an 
annual basis through mandatory climate 
change reporting.
Scottish Government Targets:
Phase out the installation of all new 
gas boilers by 2035 at the latest.  
By 2024, all new homes consented are 
to use zero emission heating.
Develop and implement a 
Council energy reduction 
strategy for Council buildings.Identify existing or future potential pilot projects or buildings 
that could help the Council test a holistic net zero approach - 
either new-build or retrofit.
All projects relating to this category will be put forward to the 
capital programme which is currently over a ten year period.  
Budget approval is agreed on an annual basis.
Prioritise climate change interventions in capital programme 
bids - including looking at building services, maintenance of 
boiler systems, etc.  This intends to be more of a proactive 
approach to decarbonising Council assets.
Research future resilience to the impacts of climate change - 
we need to avoid future overheating risks and wasted energy 
through having to cool buildings mechanically.
Where technically feasible and cost effective, implement 
non-domestic building sustainability and energy efficiency 
standards that go beyond standard mandatory regulations - 
e.g. Passivhaus; EnerPHit; BREEAM; Scottish Government 
Sustainability Standard; and Net Zero Public Sector Building 
Standard (NZPBS); etc.
Based on each type of building or project, a climate change 
modelling approach will be developed to measure and report 
on the overall environmental benefits of climate change 
interventions and remaining emissions.  The scale and scope 
of which will vary depending on each project and on the 
feasibility/cost of doing so. 
Improve and expand efforts for energy reduction at Council 
sites and future developments through further fabric improve -
ments, the installation of low-energy systems (e.g. lighting and 
heating), improved controls and insulation measures.2021 - 2026
(Long-term 
target of 2045)Corporate; 
Wider 
CommunityEnergy & Compliance; 
Asset Management
Planning; Regeneration; DLO; 
Organisation WideScottish Government;
Scottish Energy Officers 
Network (SEON);
Sustainable Scotland 
Network (SSN);
Scottish Futures Trust 
(SFT)
Local communityCouncil Capital;
Scottish Government 
funding: LCITP; GGA; 
Various
SALIXWill develop a monitoring approach as soon 
as we identify projects. But projects are 
currently being identified for future potential.
Current energy efficiency works are 
monitored by E&C, and reported to finance 
on an annual basis.
Currently monitored on an annual basis 
alongside carbon reduction targets - this is 
reported to Scottish Government through 
mandatory climate change reporting.
Will be monitored and reviewed by Climate 
Change Action Group on a regular basis and 
our internal risk management system.
Scottish Government Targets:
Phase out the installation of all new gas 
boilers by 2035 at the latest.  
Develop and implement a 
Council water consumption 
reduction strategy for Council 
buildings.We must first Identify potential  buildings that require water 
efficiency improvements, alongside the approach we currently 
take to energy efficiency measures.
Where technically feasible and cost effective, review existing 
Council sites to reduce and reuse water consumption through 
technologies and behaviour change measures. This should also 
be extended to newer sites and developments. 
Ensure that water efficiency measures are included in new projects 
and building renovations and constructions, where feasible.2021 - 2026
(Long-term 
target of 2045)Corporate Energy & Compliance; 
Asset Management
DLOFramework provider - 
Business Stream;
Scottish Government;
Scottish Energy Officers 
Network (SEON);
Sustainable Scotland 
Network (SSN);Council Capital;
Scottish Government 
funding (Various)
SALIXA monitoring approach will be identified 
following identification of buildings and 
interventions.
Current water efficiency works are 
monitored by E&C, and reported to finance 
on an annual basis.
Report to Scottish Government on an 
annual basis through mandatory climate 
change reporting.CLIMATE CHANGE ACTION PLAN - TAKING ACTION FOR A NET ZERO FUTUREAction Scope Timescale Focus Service Lead and 
Supporting Service 
AreasStakeholder 
EngagementResourcing Monitoring
Review the Council’s estate 
to explore the full potential 
for installation of renewable 
energy technologies. Where 
feasible and cost effective, 
accelerate the implementation 
of renewables projects.The Council, with support from external consultants 
(when required),  will carry out feasibility studies and analysis 
where appropriate.
The outcome of studies will identify recommendations for 
projects to increase renewable energy generation within the 
Council estate, taking account of technological, practical and 
funding limitations. 
The Council will then agree on a mechanism of deciding 
whether to proceed with study recommendations and 
implement renewables projects (either directly or with 3rd 
parties) on a phased basis.
Future projects/buildings will be reviewed for renewable 
potential alongside energy efficiency measures.2021 - 2026
(Long-term 
target of 2045)Corporate; 
Wider 
CommunityEnergy & Compliance; 
Asset Management  
Planning; Regeneration; DLO; 
Organisation WideLocal Energy Scotland
Local communityCouncil Capital
Scottish Government 
funding (various)
SALIX
CARESA monitoring approach will be identified 
following identification of buildings, land 
and interventions.
Current energy efficiency works are 
monitored by E&C, and reported to finance 
on an annual basis.
Report to Scottish Government on an 
annual basis through mandatory climate 
change reporting.
Will be monitored and reviewed by 
Climate Change Action Group on a 
regular basis.  
Develop and implement a 
Renewable Energy Strategy.The Strategy will provide a supportive framework for the growth 
of the renewable sector (including sites and supply chains) 
in West Dunbartonshire, with details of where renewables 
developments can be sited provided in associated planning 
guidance. It is recognised there are a number of environmental 
constraints which limit renewables deployment in some parts 
of the Council area, but new planning guidance should provide 
a supportive policy framework for renewables developments of 
the appropriate type in appropriate locations.
Will support implementation of renewable energy 
developments both within the Council and for communities 
across West Dunbartonshire.  The Strategy will be applied in 
combination with new Renewable Energy Planning Guidance 
to provide a supportive policy framework for renewables 
developments in appropriate locations.
All Council service areas will liaise with and support Planning in 
the development of this strategy.
Ensure the Council adopts a cross-cutting approach to support 
the deployment of renewables in alignment with other relevant 
Council and national policies. 2021 - 2022
(Long-term 
target of 2045)Corporate; 
Wider 
CommunityPlanning;  Regeneration;  
Energy & Compliance
Asset Management; GIS; 
Organisation WideLocal Energy Scotland
Scottish Government
Local communityCouncil Capital
Scottish Government 
funding (various)
SALIX
CARESA monitoring approach will be identified 
during the development of the strategy.
Report to Scottish Government on an annual 
basis through mandatory climate change 
reporting.
Will be monitored and reviewed by Climate 
Change Action Group on a regular basis and 
our internal risk management system.
Where feasible and cost 
effective, the Council will 
continue to optimise the use 
of existing assets and buildings, 
prioritising building retrofit, 
adaptation, re-use and 
maintenance over new 
construction.This default position will underpin the development of the 
Council’s new Asset Management Plan, which will define 
parameters to implement this action
Research the carbon benefits of reusing buildings and 
structures over new construction, and contribute to waste 
solutions for construction.
Utilise an approach that captures the benefits of Whole-Life 
Costing (WLC) and Embodied Carbon of assets, transport, 
construction materials and supply chains. 
This applies to the maintenance, retention and appropriate 
Adaptation of  the historic environment/traditional non-
domestic buildings.2021 - 2026
(Long-term 
target of 2045)Corporate; 
Wider 
CommunityAsset Management
Energy & Compliance; Planning; 
Regeneration; DLO; Corporate 
Procurement Unit; Organisation 
WideSustainable Scotland 
Network (SSN);
Scottish Energy Officers 
Network (SEON);
Local CommunityCouncil Capital;
Scottish Government 
funding (various);
SALIXWill be monitored and reviewed by Climate 
Change Action Group on a regular basis and 
our internal risk management system.
Will develop a monitoring approach as soon 
as we identify buildings and interventions.
Report to Scottish Government on an annual 
basis through mandatory climate change 
reporting.CLIMATE CHANGE ACTION PLAN - TAKING ACTION FOR A NET ZERO FUTUREAction Scope Timescale Focus Service Lead and 
Supporting Service 
AreasStakeholder 
EngagementResourcing Monitoring
Continue to improve energy 
efficiency in social housing. 
Identify and implement 
further energy efficiency 
improvements to existing 
domestic council stock and 
future developments, whilst 
minimising overheating risks.Delivery of action is defined by a range of 
national strategies and approaches.
We will develop a holistic energy efficiency strategy 
for our housing stock taking into consideration both 
decarbonisation and fuel poverty. 
We will deliver our Housing Asset Management Strategy. 
New homes developed by the Council,  will be developed 
to a NetZero standard. 
Progress on the LHEES will be monitored internally via the 
Climate Change Action Group and reported back to the Chief 
Executive board.  The LHEES will inform the short, medium 
and long term approach to energy efficiency going forward.  
The LHEES will identify further recommended interventions 
over and above our existing energy efficiency works  
The new Local Housing Strategy (LHS ) will confirm and 
then set further actions and targets to achieve this. 
National Building Standards and Planning legislation will 
need to be adapted and improved to make this easier for 
Council’s to make this more realistically achievable.2021 - 2026 
(Long-term 
target of 2032)Corporate; 
Wider 
CommunityHousing
Energy & Compliance; 
Planning; Regeneration; 
DLO; Organisation WideEnergy Savings Trust 
(EST)
Tenants
Wider public
Local communityCouncil Capital;
Housing Revenue 
Account (HRA) funding
Scottish Government 
fundingMeasure these improvements by 
EESSH 2 returns to regulator.
Upon development of future area based 
LHEES, will use this to measure and 
deliver energy efficiency/climate change 
improvements.
Continue to implement HEEPS:ABS 
improvements to private domestic 
properties.
Research future resilience to the 
impacts of climate change.
Targets for actions will be integrated 
into our internal risk management system.
Report to Scottish Government on an 
annual basis through mandatory climate 
change reporting.
Successful delivery will be governed 
by EESSH 2, the pilot LHEES (and 
subsequent area based LHEES thereafter) 
and HEEPS:ABS schemes.
Both EESSH 2 and HEEPS:ABS have 
national targets that have to be met on 
an annual basis and reported back to 
Scottish Government.
Scottish Government Targets:
By 2024, all new homes consented 
are to use zero emission heating.
Phase out the installation of all new 
gas boilers by 2035 at the latest. HousingCLIMATE CHANGE ACTION PLAN - TAKING ACTION FOR A NET ZERO FUTUREAction Scope Timescale Focus Service Lead and 
Supporting Service 
AreasStakeholder 
EngagementResourcing Monitoring
Where feasible, we will consider 
options to retrofit, renovate 
and maintain existing domestic 
buildings over the construction 
of new buildings and develop -
ments.If as a result of our energy efficiency strategy findings, 
buildings are deemed not viable then rebuild of more energy 
efficient alternatives will be carried out.
The action will ensure that the Council always considers the 
opportunities of retaining/retrofit/renovation/maintenance 
before demolition, for Council projects and buildings that we 
have influence over.
The new Local Housing Strategy (LHS) will set further 
actions and targets to achieve this.  
Research the carbon benefits of reusing buildings and 
structures over new construction, and contribute to waste 
solutions for construction.
This will apply to the maintenance, retention and appropriate 
adaptation of  the historic environment/traditional domestic 
buildings.2022 - 26
(Long-term 
target of 2045)Corporate; 
Wider 
CommunityHousing
Energy & Compliance; 
Planning; Regeneration; 
DLO; Organisation WideTenants 
Wider public
Local communityCouncil Capital
Housing Revenue 
Account (HRA) funding
Scottish Government 
fundingAsk for information to be shared on findings 
from pilot research.
This is linked to the Council Asset 
Management Strategy and how the 
Council will ensure prioritisation of 
retrofit on a building/project basis.
Targets for actions will be integrated 
into our internal risk management system.
Report to Scottish Government on an 
annual basis through mandatory climate 
change reporting.
Scottish Government Targets:
By 2024, all new homes consented 
are to use zero emission heating.
Phase out the installation of all new 
gas boilers by 2035 at the latest.  
Where feasible and cost 
effective, implement domestic 
building sustainability, energy 
efficiency or design standards 
which go beyond standard 
mandatory regulations.  
In all decisions and practices 
the Council will encourage 
housing delivery (both 
Council led and external) 
to demonstrably contribute 
to the achievement of net 
zero emissions by 2045.The WDC Design Standard requires Silver Active building 
standard for all new affordable build developments, we will l
ook to surpass this standard and develop homes which are even 
more energy efficient, where the budget and design allows.  
This will be set out in the upcoming LHS and overseen by the 
More Homes Project Board.  
An internal net zero working-group, under the governance of 
the Better Homes Project Board and overseeing the energy 
efficiency strategy, has been formed and is currently identifying 
potential pilot projects for action which will consider Passivhaus 
Enerphit amongst other sustainability standards. This will be 
overseen by the Better Homes Project Board.
To support the implementation of the Council’s aspiration for a 
net zero approach to Housing, LDP (planning) guidance will be 
prepared to encourage private developers to develop homes at 
this higher energy efficiency standard. This approach must also 
ensure that Fuel Poverty is addressed and that the transition to 
net zero heating systems does not increase the costs of heating 
bills for residents or tenants.2021 - 26
(Long-term 
target of 2045)Corporate; 
Wider 
CommunityHousing; Planning
Energy & Compliance; 
Planning; Regeneration; 
DLO; Organisation WideTenants
Wider public
Local communityCouncil Capital
Housing Revenue 
Account (HRA) funding
Scottish Government 
fundingProgress monitored via Climate Change 
Action Group and net zero sub-group More 
Homes and Better Homes Project Boards. 
Targets for actions will be integrated into our 
internal risk management system.
Report to Scottish Government on an annual 
basis through mandatory climate change 
reporting.
Scottish Government Targets:
By 2024, all new homes consented are 
to use zero emission heating.
Phase out the installation of all new 
gas boilers by 2035 at the latest.  
Identify and test a holistic 
housing project to tackle fuel 
poverty and climate change in 
tandem using alternative fuel 
sources (e.g. Solar Panels). 
This pilot will help inform the 
approach to domestic housing 
across West Dunbartonshire.
Action continued on next page...The Council will  define high level parameters for the 
development and subsequent  appraisal criteria. 
An internal net zero working-group has been formed and is 
currently identifying potential pilot projects for action. This will 
also align with the Council Local Housing Strategy (LHS).
The social impact of the project will also be addressed.
Using a pilot project as a testbed, the working group will 
develop an internal standard/checklist that considers the 
approach as identified in the previous action. A business case 
will then be developed with costs, savings and climate change 
improvements identified.  2022 - 26
(Long-term 
target of 2045)Corporate; 
Wider 
CommunityHousing
Energy & Compliance; 
Planning; Regeneration; DLO; 
Organisation WideTenants 
Wider public
Local communityCouncil Capital
Housing Revenue 
Account (HRA) funding
Scottish Government 
fundingInternal net zero working-group will 
discuss and implement the project, and 
will measure progress reporting back to 
Chief Executive.
Ask for information to be shared on 
findings from pilot research.
Targets for actions will be integrated into 
our internal risk management system.
Report to Scottish Government on an 
annual basis through mandatory climate 
change reporting.
Scottish Government Targets:
By 2024, all new homes consented are 
to use zero emission heating.
Phase out the installation of all new 
gas boilers by 2035 at the latest.CLIMATE CHANGE ACTION PLAN - TAKING ACTION FOR A NET ZERO FUTUREAction Scope Timescale Focus Service Lead and 
Supporting Service 
AreasStakeholder 
EngagementResourcing Monitoring
Action continued from 
previous page...
Identify and test a holistic 
housing project to tackle fuel 
poverty and climate change in 
tandem using alternative fuel 
sources (e.g. Solar Panels). 
This pilot will help inform the 
approach to domestic housing 
across West Dunbartonshire.When the Council identifies what is most effective, 
this will then lead to the improvement and completion 
of our standard/checklist - updating and improving it as 
technologies and practices improve.
An internal Monitoring & Targeting mechanism will be 
developed to measure progress and impacts.  Resourcing 
will come from Housing service area with internal support 
from Energy & Compliance and others.
This approach must also ensure that Fuel Poverty is addressed 
and that the transition to net zero heating systems does not 
increase the costs of heating bills for residents or tenants.2022 - 26
(Long-term 
target of 2045)Corporate; 
Wider 
CommunityHousing
Energy & Compliance; 
Planning; Regeneration; DLO; 
Organisation WideTenants 
Wider public
Local communityCouncil Capital
Housing Revenue 
Account (HRA) funding
Scottish Government 
fundingInternal net zero working-group will 
discuss and implement the project, and 
will measure progress reporting back to 
Chief Executive.
Ask for information to be shared on findings 
from pilot research.
Targets for actions will be integrated into 
our internal risk management system.
Report to Scottish Government on an 
annual basis through mandatory climate 
change reporting.
Scottish Government Targets:
By 2024, all new homes consented are 
to use zero emission heating.
Phase out the installation of all new 
gas boilers by 2035 at the latest.  CLIMATE CHANGE ACTION PLAN - TAKING ACTION FOR A NET ZERO FUTUREAction Scope Timescale Focus Service Lead and 
Supporting Service 
AreasStakeholder 
EngagementResourcing Monitoring
Implement and monitor a new 
Circular Economy and Waste 
Reduction Strategy for West 
Dunbartonshire - detailing how 
the Council will help reduce, 
reuse and recycle, detailing 
corporate standards, targets 
and staff guidance for our 
waste activities, including 
improving infrastructure.Draft Strategy to be developed with cross-service input 
from various service areas, particularly sustainability.
This will apply to both Council operational waste and 
domestic waste from all households across the Council area.
This will establish true costs of waste disposal and 
assigning responsibility to service areas through 
transparent accounting.
This will review and improve corporate and domestic 
waste processes and infrastructure to ensure compliance, 
improve standards and improve monitoring and reporting 
on waste. 
The strategy will set actions to develop and 
implement a  Litter Prevention Strategy and Action Plan 
for West Dunbartonshire.
This will involve reviewing what the Council and 
residents can do to reduce litter - including barriers 
and challenges to informing positive behaviours.
A communications strategy will also need to be devolved, 
with input from Education and Communications, and support 
from Keep Scotland Beautiful.  This will involve input from the 
local community to understand what would empower them to 
take action on  Circular Economy  behaviours.
This will better inform current clean ups to support the 
Upstream Battle campaign (delivered with extensive support 
from Friends of Dumbarton Foreshore and Friends of Leven 
River Valley) and prevent marine plastics reaching the river.  
Whilst existing work is being carried out, a more proactive 
and strategic approach that involves West Dunbartonshire 
residents more closely, must be adopted.
The strategy will set actions to support the 
delivery of the national Deposit and Return Scheme 
for Scotland where feasible. 2021 - 2026 Corporate; 
Wider 
CommunityFleet & Waste Shared 
Services; Neighbourhood  
Services; Education 
 
Corporate Procurement Unit; 
Organisation WideKeep Scotland Beautiful
Zero Waste Scotland 
(ZWS)
SEPA
Marine Conservation
Local CommunityCouncil Capital
Council Revenue
Scottish Government 
FundingProgress will reviewed by Waste Services 
on an Quarterly basis and reported back to 
ORG.
Report to Scottish Government on an 
annual basis through mandatory climate 
change reporting.
Will be monitored and reviewed by 
Climate Change Action Group on a 
regular basis.  
When a strategy is developed, and when 
actions are developed, this will be input into 
our internal risk management system.
Scottish Government Targets:
By 2025 - 95% reduction of landfill waste.Waste and Circular EconomyCLIMATE CHANGE ACTION PLAN - TAKING ACTION FOR A NET ZERO FUTUREAction Scope Timescale Focus Service Lead and 
Supporting Service 
AreasStakeholder 
EngagementResourcing Monitoring
Develop a new Materials/
Resources Transfer Station 
for West Dunbartonshire.This will require input from multiple services and involve 
neighbouring Local Authorities.
Development of a new Transfer Station will open up new 
more sustainable or more efficient options for residual waste 
management, providing the required recycling functions for all 
waste streams generated by residents and the Council.  
Providing the required recycling functions for West 
Dunbartonshire should help considerably in the reduction 
of emissions from Waste and help to achieve 95% reduction 
of landfill waste as required by Scottish Government. 
In providing the required infrastructure this should 
encourage, alongside more effective communication 
with residence, increased recycling behaviours in residents, 
reducing emissions from waste going to landfill.
This will apply to both Council operational waste and 
domestic waste from all households across the Council area.
A circular economy/recycling communications plan will 
be developed and delivered during and after development.
Work with  the wider sector and Local Authorities to identify 
best practice and approaches to waste minimisations and the 
circular economy.2021 - 2025 Corporate; 
Wider 
CommunityFleet & Waste Shared Services;  
Corporate Procurement Unit; 
Communications; Organisation 
WideZero Waste Scotland
Local CommunityCouncil Capital
Scottish Government 
fundingProgress will reviewed by Waste Services on 
an Quarterly basis and reported back to ORG.
Will be monitored and reviewed by Climate 
Change Action Group on a regular basis
Scottish Government Targets:
By 2025 - 95% reduction of landfill waste. 
Research and implement 
alternative and/or innovative 
waste recycling and circular 
economy facilities and projects, 
e.g. for Anaerobic Digestion 
(AD) and similar technologies.Where feasible and cost effective, will implement projects/
technologies that focus both on Internal operations and 
external public - therefore considering emissions from 
Council and public waste).
Identify areas where we can undertake focused waste 
transformation projects involving packaging, plastics, 
printing and biodegradable waste, including championing 
digital and reusable alternatives and composting alongside 
reducing the amount of non recyclable materials and products 
we purchase and produce.
Engage with other public bodies and organisations to 
research and review technologies that are currently available - 
e.g. Rocket composter2023 - 2045 Corporate; 
Wider 
CommunityFleet & Waste Shared Services;
Asset Management; Corporate 
Procurement Unit; GreenspaceZero Waste Scotland
Local CommunityCouncil Capital Progress will reviewed by Waste Services on 
an Quarterly basis and reported back to ORG
Will be monitored and reviewed by Climate 
Change Action Group on a regular basis
Scottish Government Targets:
By 2025 - 95% reduction of landfill waste.
Undertake a review and
implement recommendations 
(where feasible)  to further 
reduce food waste and food 
miles in all council buildings 
and schoolsA review of Food miles across the council will need to be 
carried out - setting a baseline so targets can be set.
Engage with other public bodies and organisations to research 
and review frameworks, process and technologies that are 
currently available to help facilitate this. Find out what other 
Local Authorities are using to determine baseline, from what 
point in the supply chain.  
Work with ZWS and LFHW to engage and advise staff and 
pupils on the importance of reducing food miles and waste.
Review options and practices for  providing sustainable 
food and meal choices, with more locally sourced ingredients 
and increased provision of vegetarian and vegan meals, 
where feasible. 
Explore how Council can - in sustainable procurement 
policy - set a framework for award criteria for reduced miles/
selection criteria for local only could be explored.2024 - 2025 Corporate; 
Wider 
CommunityLeisure Trust; HSCP; Education
Fleet & Waste Services; 
Corporate Procurement Unit; Zero Waste Scotland
Love Food Hate Waste
Keep Scotland Beautiful
Sustainable Scotland 
Network (SSN)
Soil Association 
Local CommunityCouncil Capital
Scottish Government 
fundingWill be monitored and reviewed by 
Climate Change Action Group on a regular 
basis.
Report to Scottish Government on an 
annual basis through mandatory climate 
change reporting.CLIMATE CHANGE ACTION PLAN - TAKING ACTION FOR A NET ZERO FUTUREAction Scope Timescale Focus Service Lead and 
Supporting Service 
AreasStakeholder 
EngagementResourcing Monitoring
For procurement activities 
under £50k, ensure no 
single-use plastics (SUP) items 
are purchased or used within 
Council schools and buildings, 
and where feasible, purchase 
more sustainable alternatives 
or adapt behaviours to reduce 
the need for these options.SUPs have carbon emissions from their construction and 
delivery.  They also incur wider environmental impacts to 
nature and biodiversity, both on land and in water.
This will be in addition to the new national regulations 
set by ZWS and SG.
Sustainable alternatives include biodegradable, 
compostable or fully recycle options.    
Are waste items and SUPs required in the first place? 
A review of service areas and their actions will then inform 
staff and pupil behaviours, or current arrangements, so people  
can use our own reusable cups and cutlery, etc. instead.  
As part of the managers meetings, the Corporate Procurement 
Unit will promote the Council’s Sustainability Procurement 
guidance.   
As part of this exercise this will ensure that staff reduce 
emissions and negative environmental impacts by supporting 
Council efforts in undertaking clean ups to support the 
Upstream Battle campaign (delivered with extensive 
support from Friends of Dumbarton Foreshore and Friends 
of Leven River Valley) and prevent marine plastics reaching 
the river.2022 - 2025 Corporate; 
Wider 
CommunityOrganisation Wide;  Education; 
Corporate Procurement Unit; 
Fleet & Waste Shared Services; 
Facilities Management; 
Energy & Compliance; 
CommunicationsZero Waste Scotland
Keep Scotland Beautiful
Local CommunityCouncil Capital
Scottish Government 
fundingWill be monitored and reviewed by Climate 
Change Action Group on a regular basis.
Report to Scottish Government on an annual 
basis through mandatory climate change 
reporting.
All WDC staffed sites to 
include waste segregation 
facilities at source (where 
feasible), encouraging staff 
towards recycling and circular 
economy practices by 
providing the required 
infrastructure and signage.Doing so will encourage positive behaviours and reduce 
emissions from waste going to landfill.
Having waste properly segregated at site makes it easier to 
carry out the necessary operations for recycling and reuse at 
materials/resource transfer stations.
This will be informed by the Council’s new waste 
and circular economy strategy.2025 Corporate Fleet & Waste Shared Services;  
Corporate Procurement Unit; 
Asset Management; Energy & 
ComplianceZero Waste Scotland
Keep Scotland Beautiful
Local CommunityCouncil Capital
Scottish Government 
fundingWill be monitored and reviewed by 
Climate Change Action Group on a 
regular basis.
Report to Scottish Government on an 
annual basis through mandatory climate 
change reporting.CLIMATE CHANGE ACTION PLAN - TAKING ACTION FOR A NET ZERO FUTUREAction Scope Timescale Focus Service Lead and 
Supporting Service 
AreasStakeholder 
EngagementResourcing Monitoring
Expand Electric Vehicle (EV) 
charging points and 
infrastructure across the 
Council estate -  where feasible.Scope and targets will be set by the CCAG and Roads, 
as informed by the ‘Switched-on Fleets (SoF)’ report developed 
by Energy Savings Trust (EST).2022 - 2025
(Long-term 
target of 2045)Corporate Roads & Transportation;  
Fleet & Waste Shared Services; 
Energy & Compliance; Asset 
Management.Energy Savings Trust 
(EST)
Transport Scotland 
Scottish GovernmentCouncil Capital
Transport Scotland 
FundingWill be monitored and reviewed by CCAG 
on a regular basis and our internal risk 
management system.
Report to Scottish Government on an 
annual basis through mandatory climate 
change reporting.
Scottish Government Targets:
Where feasible, Public Bodies must 
decarbonised their fleet by 2025.
Expand Electric Vehicle (EV) 
charging points and 
infrastructure across 
West Dunbartonshire -  
where feasible.Scope and targets will be set by the CCAG and Roads, 
as informed by the ‘Switched-on Towns and Cities (SoTC)’ 
report developed by Energy Savings Trust (EST).2022 - 2025
(Long-term 
target of 2045)Corporate; 
Wider 
CommunityFleet & Waste Shared Services 
Roads & Transportation; 
Energy & Compliance; Asset 
Management.Energy Savings Trust 
(EST);
Transport Scotland; 
Scottish Government
Local CommunityCouncil Capital;
Transport Scotland 
FundingWill be monitored and reviewed by CCAG on a 
regular basis and our internal risk 
management system.
Report to Scottish Government on an annual 
basis through mandatory climate change 
reporting.
Consolidate and reduce the 
Council’s pool fleet, ensuring 
that remaining fossil fuel fleet 
are replaced with Ultra-Low 
Emission Vehicles (ULEVs) or 
Zero Emission Vehicles (ZEVs) 
where technically feasible.A staff travel and fleet management system will be developed 
and implemented  to encourage and support sustainable travel 
choices.
Encourage behaviour to limit use of car as much as possible but 
when a car is required it should be electric. Improved management 
of low carbon transport - develop procedure for this. 
Scope and targets will be set by the Climate Change Action 
Group, and informed by the ‘Switched-on Fleets (SoF)’.  
Current SoF feasibility study provides high level guidance on 
where to situate fleet charging points.  But this will require an 
internal depot and building review to both consolidate buildings 
and better locate potential charge points and fleet vehicles.
The Council must also review use of remaining fossil fuel 
powered vehicles to ensure alignment with Climate Change 
and Sustainability objectives.2021 - 2025
(Long-term 
target of 2045)Corporate Fleet & Waste Shared Services; 
Asset Management
Roads & Transportation; 
Energy & Compliance;Energy Savings Trust 
(EST)
Transport Scotland 
Scottish GovernmentCouncil Capital;
Transport Scotland 
FundingWill be monitored and reviewed by CCAG 
on a regular basis and our internal risk 
management system.
Report to Scottish Government on an annual 
basis through mandatory climate change 
reporting.
Scottish Government Targets:
Where feasible, Public Bodies must 
decarbonise their fleet by 2025.Sustainable TravelCLIMATE CHANGE ACTION PLAN - TAKING ACTION FOR A NET ZERO FUTUREAction Scope Timescale Focus Service Lead and 
Supporting Service 
AreasStakeholder 
EngagementResourcing Monitoring
Adopt and take action to 
implement Sustainable people, 
places and connections, 
for both WDC staff and for 
communities across West 
Dunbartonshire.This will be informed and actioned via the Active & Sustainable 
Travel Strategy and Action Plan (ASTSAP) currently being 
developed for West Dunbartonshire.  Ensuring it illustrates the 
requirements of the NTS2, Local Transport Strategy and 20 
minute neighbourhoods and parking. This will involve input from 
the local community to understand what would empower them 
to take action and support sustainable travel.
Detailed implementation proposals to achieve sustainable 
modal shift and support an increase in active travel will be 
detailed in Active & Sustainable Travel Strategy. This should 
support the community in being able to make better Sustainable 
and Active Travel choices.
Focussing efforts on the public and staff using the green travel 
hierarchy approach, but also ensuring that positive behaviour 
change can occur by providing the relevant infrastructure and 
facilities, etc. 
A baseline of barriers/challenges to sustainable travel, 
for the public and staff, will be developed - using (but not 
limited to) GIS data, open source travel data, public surveys 
and consultation questions and internal Council data.
A review of emissions/pollution around hotspot areas and 
schools will be carried out,  with action taken as a result of 
proactive research identifying problem areas from the ASTSAP.
Improve and expand existing active travel infrastructure 
across West Dunbartonshire, including the development 
improvement of existing active travel path networks. This will 
involve input from the local community to understand what 
best supports them.
Review areas of high vehicle traffic and emissions around schools 
to advise and inform greener travel alternatives where necessary.
A new staff sustainable travel policy and guidance will be 
developed, with support from communications team on internal 
communications.
But a further exercise in analysing staff commuting habits 
and distances needs to be carried out (particularly in response 
to the global pandemic) to better understand benefits of 
working from home, particularly since this displaced carbon 
emission to activities at home.2022-2026
(Long-term 
target of 2045)Corporate; 
Wider 
CommunityRoads & Transportation; 
Fleet & Waste Shared Services
Energy & Compliance; 
Asset Management;  
Communications; 
Communities; Education; 
HSCP; GIS; Air Quality; 
Environmental Health.Energy Savings Trust 
(EST)
Transport Scotland
Scottish Government
Sustrans
Cycling Scotland
Paths for All
Local CommunityCouncil Capital;
Cycling Scotland 
Funding
Sustrans Funding
Transport Scotland 
Funding
Smarter Choices 
Smarter Places (SCSP) 
funding.Will be monitored and reviewed by CCAG 
on a regular basis and our internal risk 
management system.
Report to Scottish Government on an 
annual basis through mandatory climate 
change reporting. 
Expand Cycle Friendly Employer 
(CFE) assessments to more 
sites and support increased 
infrastructure whilst improving 
access to, and availability of, 
pool bikes, electric bikes and 
associated schemes for staff.Service areas to review their own staff travel behaviours and 
fund the purchasing of pool bikes or sustainable travel alternatives.
Aimed internally to support staff sustainable and active travel 
alternatives and positive behaviour change.
A review of staff sites that will still be used regularly for office 
hours and other activities will be carried out, recording what 
sites still require improvements for CFE.2022-2026 Corporate Energy & Compliance; Asset 
Management.
Organisation Wide.Cycling Scotland
Paths for All
SustransCouncil Capital
Cycling Scotland 
Funding
Sustrans Funding
Transport Scotland 
Funding
Smarter Choices Smarter 
Places (SCSP) funding.Will be monitored and reviewed by CCAG 
on a regular basis.
Report to Scottish Government on an annual 
basis through mandatory climate change 
reporting.CLIMATE CHANGE ACTION PLAN - TAKING ACTION FOR A NET ZERO FUTUREAction Scope Timescale Focus Service Lead and 
Supporting Service 
AreasStakeholder 
EngagementResourcing Monitoring
Expand and improve ICT 
software and technologies 
to enable staff to enable 
agile working to reduce staff 
commuting and associated 
environmental impacts.As work patterns develop and change, particularly as a result 
of the pandemic, the Council will continue to review staff 
behaviours and have managers engage with staff to agree 
work styles.
This will happen alongside adaptive reuse of Council buildings 
going forward.
A further exercise in analysing staff commuting habits and 
distances is required to better understand benefits/challenges 
of working from home, particularly since this has displaced 
carbon emissions from the Council carbon footprint to 
individual activities at home.2021 - 2026
(Long-term 
target of 2045)Corporate ICT
Corporate Procurement Unit; 
Asset Management; Energy & 
Compliance; HSCPCouncil Capital Will be monitored and reviewed by CCAG 
on a regular basis.
Report to Scottish Government on an annual 
basis through mandatory climate change 
reporting.CLIMATE CHANGE ACTION PLAN - TAKING ACTION FOR A NET ZERO FUTUREAction Scope Timescale Focus Service Lead and 
Supporting Service 
AreasStakeholder 
EngagementResourcing Monitoring
Develop Sustainability 
Procurement guidance and 
promote their implementation 
throughout the Council.To develop specific Council Sustainability Procurement 
guidance to help encourage the adoption of more sustainable 
procurement behaviours.  The aim is to reduce Council and 
public emissions by encouraging staff to make procurement 
choices that reduce environmental impacts and emissions 
through the supply chain, construction, etc. 
To encourage behaviour change in staff who do procurement 
practices so they make efforts to learn more about what they 
can do to reduce environmental impacts, and therefore make 
better decisions as a result.  This can be supported by internal 
reminders and communications.
Where technically feasible and cost effective. implement 
climate change, carbon and circularity principles in tenders 
via this process. This can then be reviewed by each evaluation 
panel member.
This will also promote positive behaviours and encourage all 
staff - carrying out procurement activities -  to sign-up for 
Scottish Government’s climate literacy training.2021 - 2022
(Long-term 
target of 2045)Corporate; 
Wider 
CommunityCorporate Procurement Unit
Organisation WideScottish Government Council Capital
Council RevenueEach CPU staff member who goes through 
procurement practices will utilise the 
Scottish Government’s guidance on 
Sustainable Procurement before tendering, 
which has been designed to help identify and 
address how the Council can optimise the 
economic, social and environmental 
outcomes of their procurement activity.
Each service area/team member who 
participates submit in tenders, must ensure 
that they encourage climate change, carbon 
and circularity principles in documentation.  
This is mandatory.
Procurement will report regularly to Climate 
Change Action Group the uptake of sustainability 
practices through all tenders being developed. 
Tenders are monitored by procurement on a 
regular basis so this they will be able to see 
if staff are adopting elements of the 
sustainability guidance in their practices.
Will be monitored and reviewed by Climate 
Change Action Group on a regular basis.
Report to Scottish Government on an annual 
basis through mandatory climate change 
reporting.
Develop a pilot to review a 
supply chain stream or 
procurement exercise for 
goods or services or contracts/
tenders, reviewing overall 
carbon emissions and 
environmental impacts 
from cradle to grave. 
Action continued on next page...Adopt a more effective Whole Life Costing (WLC) approach to 
ensure operational sustainability for future developments and 
procurement exercises. This WLC  approach will be based on 
measuring value, not just costs. A WLC (Inc. carbon 
monetisation) investment appraisal framework could be 
developed as a result of this Climate Change Action Plan.
The Council need to identify what procurement exercise or 
supply chain stream to use for testing this pilot, ensuring that 
the WLC approach is simple and illustrated clearly.  The option 
will be selected based on Council capacity and service area 
ownership will also require clarification.2023 - 2026 Corporate; 
Wider 
CommunityOrganisation Wide
Corporate Procurement Unit; 
Planning; Regeneration; 
Energy & Compliance; 
Asset Management;Scottish Government Council Capital
Council Revenue
Scottish Government 
fundingWill be monitored and reviewed by Climate 
Change Action Group on a regular basis, using 
our own internal KPI’s at first, then working 
with SG and ZWS to see how this can be 
measured fully as a deliverable in the future.
Report to Scottish Government on an 
annual basis through mandatory climate 
change reporting.Sustainable ProcurementCLIMATE CHANGE ACTION PLAN - TAKING ACTION FOR A NET ZERO FUTUREAction Scope Timescale Focus Service Lead and 
Supporting Service 
AreasStakeholder 
EngagementResourcing Monitoring
Action continued from 
previous page...
Expand and improve ICT 
software and technologies 
to enable staff to enable 
agile working to reduce staff 
commuting and associated 
environmental impacts.The approach to collecting data and information on the 
benefits of delivery will also need to be agreed internally 
through the Climate Change Action Group. 
Gain a better understanding of the national approach for 
measuring climate change targets, through appropriate public 
body networks and other local Authorities. The Council may 
engage with and request support from  Zero Waste Scotland 
or other government departments to do so. This will identify if 
there are other similar projects or research exercises that could 
assist the Council going forward.
Use this project to test how we can set organisational 
targets for the procurement of materials (including 
construction materials) that are local, recycled and have 
low-to-no environmental impacts.  
Suggested solutions will include (but not limited to) -  i) the 
true cost of disposal to be included at point of purchase, 
even if that’s in 20years time; and  ii) solutions that have second 
life use rather than disposal, to be built into award criteria .
Make efforts to better source materials for projects that are 
reused from other areas, or are recycled or upcycled from 
elsewhere. 
This will need to be built into specifications and award criteria 
where feasible.2023 - 2026 Corporate; 
Wider 
Community Organisation Wide
Corporate Procurement Unit; 
Planning; Regeneration; 
Energy & Compliance; 
Asset Management;Scottish Government Council Capital
Council Revenue
Scottish Government 
fundingWill be monitored and reviewed by Climate 
Change Action Group on a regular basis, using 
our own internal KPI’s at first, then working 
with SG and ZWS to see how this can be 
measured fully as a deliverable in the future.
Report to Scottish Government on an 
annual basis through mandatory climate 
change reporting.
Promote a sustainable 
approach to procurement 
of appliances and equipment 
based on energy efficiency and 
wider sustainability credentials 
rather than solely cost.A national hardware contract is currently in place, but the 
Council will need develop a policy on buying more efficient 
options rather that lowest cost. I.e. computer monitors that are 
A++ and not a lower energy efficiency band.
This will be developed through the Climate Change Action 
Group, with support from ICT, Procurement, Education, 
Asset Management and Energy & Compliance.
Communications through internal communications channels 
and national campaigns  will help inform staff accordingly.2021 - 2026
(Long-term 
target of 2045)Corporate ICT
Corporate Procurement Unit; 
Energy & Compliance; 
Communications; 
Organisation WideScottish Government Council Capital Will be monitored and reviewed by Climate 
Change Action Group on a regular basis.
Report to Scottish Government on an 
annual basis through mandatory climate 
change reporting.CLIMATE CHANGE ACTION PLAN - TAKING ACTION FOR A NET ZERO FUTUREAction Scope Timescale Focus Service Lead and 
Supporting Service 
AreasStakeholder 
EngagementResourcing Monitoring
Approve and implement 
LDP2 Green Network and 
Green Infrastructure 
planning guidance, including 
reviewing further 
opportunities for green 
infrastructure improvement.  
This will be informed by 
engagement with relevant 
consultees including 
NatureScot.
Actions continued on next page...LDP2 - Green Network Guidance (almost ready to go to 
committee) could be linked to this.
Will require a review of all current geographical and 
GIS data, including NatureScot datasets, or similar.
This will require the Council to research the benefits 
and opportunities of green infrastructure, to improve 
Biodiversity and reduce negative environmental impacts 
of our activities across West Dunbartonshire.  his will be 
informed by engagement with relevant consultees including 
NatureScot.
Ensure this links with Council policies and guidance - 
including the Local Housing Strategy.
A future priority to move towards zero carbon is to embrace, 
as a Council priority, a green infrastructure first approach to 
green design and development.
The LDPP2 will support the design, development and 
implementation of nature-based solutions to help cope 
with climate change (such as restoring peatlands to help 
increase resilience to climate change; woodland restoration 
to help absorb carbon; natural flood management, such as 
re-naturalising the course of rivers and restoration of their 
adjacent habitats to slow down and hold water during heavy 
rain events; managed realignment, to allow coastal habitats, 
and the benefits they bring, to migrate landward instead of 
being lost to sea-level rise; and creating nature friendly 
SUDS to cope with the predictions of increased rainfall).  
This includes the management and enhancement of other 
habitats such as naturalised grassland areas and 
wildflower meadows.2022 - 2026
(Long-term 
target of 2045)Corporate
Wider 
CommunityPlanning; Greenspace
Regeneration; Asset 
Management; Energy & 
Compliance;Forestry and Land 
Scotland
Loch Lomond & the 
Trossachs National Park
Adaptation Scotland
Climate Ready Clyde
Central Scotland Green 
Network (CSGN)
NatureScot
Local CommunityCouncil Capital
Council Revenue
Scottish Government 
funding
CSGN Funding
 Other external fundingWill be monitored and reviewed by Climate 
Change Action Group on a regular basis.
Report to Scottish Government on an 
annual basis through mandatory climate 
change reporting. 
Report back to Scottish Government as 
part of the Biodiversity Duty Report on a 
3 year basis.Biodiversity, Landscape & GreenspaceCLIMATE CHANGE ACTION PLAN - TAKING ACTION FOR A NET ZERO FUTUREAction Scope Timescale Focus Service Lead and 
Supporting Service 
AreasStakeholder 
EngagementResourcing Monitoring
Actions continued from 
previous page...
Analyse the habitat and 
sequestration benefits of 
existing trees and flora across 
the West Dunbartonshire area 
to better understand how the 
Council (with partners) can 
increase Greenhouse Gas (GHG) 
sequestrationThe Council will plan to develop a baseline understanding of 
our tree/flora cover to estimate current carbon sequestration 
levels.
Once this has been developed, further analysis/review 
must be carried out on developing new sequestration actions 
and in developing existing and future tree planting regimes.  
Such as - our approach to planting on an annual basis.  
Furthermore, natural woodland regeneration should be 
considered (where there is an existing seed source, or seed 
bank, and livestock can be excluded).  
In order to reduce the risk of introducing disease when planting 
trees, where tree planting is still considered the best option - 
trees should be of local provenance to try to reduce the risk of 
inducing disease.
In response to Scottish Government advice and guidance, 
the Council will research opportunities for the removal of GHG 
emissions from the atmosphere, including (but not limited to) 
rewilding,  improving existing tree planting regimes; peatland 
restoration and new tree planting initiatives.  
This will involve community engagement and the improvement 
of local Biodiversity and air quality. There should be a focus on 
protecting existing trees along with new planting .
A formal consultancy feasibility study into peatland 
management  will be carried out, outlining and detailing 
specific peatland restoration programmes that would be 
eligible for this round of funding.2021 - 2026
(Long-term 
target of 2045)Corporate; 
Wider 
CommunityGreenspace
Energy & ComplianceForestry and Land 
Scotland
Loch Lomond & the 
Trossachs National Park 
Central Scotland Green 
Network (CSGN)
Glasgow & Clyde Valley 
Green Network (GCV)
Adaptation Scotland
Climate Ready Clyde
Scottish Government
NatureScot
Sustainable Scotland 
Network (SSN)
Local CommunityCouncil Capital
Council Revenue
Scottish Government 
funding (various)Will be monitored and reviewed by Climate 
Change Action Group on a regular basis.
Report to Scottish Government on an annual 
basis through mandatory climate change 
reporting.
Report back to Scottish Government as part 
of the Biodiversity Duty Report on a 3 year 
basis.
Develop a new Local 
Biodiversity Action Plan (LBAP), 
including initiatives to support 
Climate Change mitigation, 
Adaptation and sustainability 
across West Dunbartonshire.
Action continued on next page...In line with new Scottish Government guidance being 
published by Oct 2022 - we will develop the scope, baseline 
and approach of the LBAP in response to the new national 
Scottish Biodiversity Strategy.
Conduct a Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) 
alongside the development of the LBAB to ensure ownership 
and to ensure actions are deliverable.
Embed biodiversity, landscape management and the Food 
Growing Strategy (FGS) into organisational targets by ensuring 
that it is considered in all appropriate decision-making.
Collate and improve all necessary data relating to biodiversity 
and landscape and develop GIS layers. This will help better set 
targets and actions for this document. Setting a good baseline 
to work from.
Improve existing greenspaces by integrating biodiversity 
and adaptation principles where feasible. Such as heat sinks 
(reducing urban heat) and carbon sequestration.
Improve communications activity and engagement on 
biodiversity and landscape and food growing - this will require a 
communications plan to be developed.
Align with adaptation requirements and the GCR Adaptation 
Strategy.2022 - 2023
(Long-term 
target of 2045)Corporate; 
Wider 
CommunityGreenspace; GIS
Planning; Communities; 
Corporate Procurement Unit; 
Communications; Organisation 
WideNatureScot
Keep Scotland Beautiful 
Sustainable Scotland 
Network (SSN)
Local CommunityCouncil Capital
Council Revenue
Scottish Government 
fundingWill be monitored and reviewed by Climate 
Change Action Group on a regular basis.
Report to Scottish Government on an 
annual basis through mandatory climate 
change reporting. 
Reported back to Climate Ready Clyde 
board on a regular basis.
When actions are set will be input into our 
internal risk management system.
Report back to Scottish Government as 
part of the Biodiversity Duty Report on a 
3 year basis.CLIMATE CHANGE ACTION PLAN - TAKING ACTION FOR A NET ZERO FUTUREAction Scope Timescale Focus Service Lead and 
Supporting Service 
AreasStakeholder 
EngagementResourcing Monitoring
Action continued from 
previous page...
Develop a new Local 
Biodiversity Action Plan (LBAP), 
including initiatives to support 
Climate Change mitigation, 
Adaptation and sustainability 
across West Dunbartonshire.The Council will stop using peat based compost and look to 
work with schools and Council Offices to compost our food 
waste at source.
The Council will develop a feasibility study into managing 
invasive non-native species - when also influenced and 
exacerbated by the impacts of Climate Change.  i.e. better using 
Glyphosate in a much more targeted way, for example in the use 
of managing invasive non-native species.
Develop a recommended species list for use in landscaping 
and for developments in parks and/or existing biodiversity 
areas. This could also include a list of recommended food crops 
for the public to support self-growing in West Dunbartonshire.2022 - 2023
(Long-term 
target of 2045)Corporate; 
Wider 
CommunityGreenspace; GIS
Planning; Communities; 
Corporate Procurement Unit; 
Communications; Organisation 
WideNatureScot
Keep Scotland Beautiful 
Sustainable Scotland 
Network (SSN)
Local CommunityCouncil Capital
Council Revenue
Scottish Government 
fundingWill be monitored and reviewed by 
Climate Change Action Group on a regular 
basis.
Report to Scottish Government on an 
annual basis through mandatory climate 
change reporting. 
Reported back to Climate Ready Clyde 
board on a regular basis.
When actions are set will be input into our 
internal risk management system.
Report back to Scottish Government as 
part of the Biodiversity Duty Report on a 
3 year basis.
Review vacant brownfield and 
greenfield sites to identify 
their potential to adopt a green 
infrastructure first approach 
and/or integrate nature based 
solutions (where appropriate) 
in order to  limit the impacts of 
land Use Change (LUC).The Council will develop a baseline understanding of land 
use and land ownership to estimate current and future 
potential.  This will also include a review of Council vacant 
and derelict land to align with wider climate change action.
Once this is understood, further analysis/review and 
engagement must be carried out on developing the Council’s 
plan of action, ensuring it aligns with other Council and national 
policies and strategies (such as the LDP2; Corporate Strategy; 
Planning Guidance, NPF4 etc.)  for a unified approach.2021 - 2045 Wider 
CommunityPlanning; Regeneration; 
Asset Management
Greenspace; Energy & 
Compliance; GISNatureScot
SEPA
Adaptation Scotland
Climate Ready Clyde
Scottish Government
Scottish Land 
Commission
Local CommunityCouncil Capital
Council Revenue
Scottish Government 
(various)Will be monitored and reviewed by 
Climate Change Action Group on a 
regular basis.
Report to Scottish Government on an 
annual basis through mandatory climate 
change reporting. CLIMATE CHANGE ACTION PLAN - TAKING ACTION FOR A NET ZERO FUTUREAction Scope Timescale Focus Service Lead and 
Supporting Service 
AreasStakeholder 
EngagementResourcing Monitoring
With support from Climate 
Ready Clyde (CRC) and wider 
Glasgow City region (GCR), 
deliver flagship actions as 
highlighted in the GCR 
Adaptation Strategy, where 
feasible and relevant.Much of the adaptation actions require cross-sector 
and authority partnerships to deliver.
The CRC board will decide and help deliver on these actions, 
ensuring a partnership approach across the GCR.
This is a long term approach running up to 2045 and beyond.  
The Adaptation Capability Framework and Climate Change Risk 
Assessment methodology for West-Dunbartonshire will help to 
further develop our approach with the support of CRC and GCR.
With support from CRC GCR, will develop adaptation engagement 
tools to support community capacity building, including 
workshops and collaboration with community organisations.
Mainstreaming of adaptation into Governance practices and 
other key council plans and strategies. This will include using 
the Climate Change Action Group to inspire action and also  
feedback Adaptation actions and progress to a higher governance 
board, attended by leaders from each service area of the Council.2021 - 2026
(Long-term 
target of 2045)Corporate; 
Wider 
CommunityRoads and Transportation; 
Planning; Regeneration
Energy & Compliance; 
Greenspace; GIS; Organisation 
WideClimate Ready Clyde
Adaptation Scotland
Local Authorities across 
the Glasgow City Region
Local CommunityCouncil Capital
Scottish Government 
fundingWill be monitored through the CRC GCR 
board, with targets and actions being set and 
prioritised as agreed and where appropriate.  
Ensuring a joined up approach across the 
GCR.
Will be monitored and reviewed by 
Climate Change Action Group on a 
regular basis.
Report to Scottish Government on an 
annual basis through mandatory climate 
change reporting. 
The Council undertake an 
internal Climate Risk and 
Vulnerability Assessment to 
both shape the implementation 
of high level actions defined in 
this Climate Change Action Plan 
and inform the development of 
further climate action (i.e. the 
next Climate Change Action 
Plan).
Action continued on next page...With data from CRC, Adaptation Scotland, SEPA and 
the Met Office - the Council will use this data to 
develop a geographical approach to high risk-areas in 
West Dunbartonshire, using GIS, supported by Climate 
Change and weather data.
This assessment will build upon and align with the 
Glasgow City Region Adaptation Strategy & Action Plan.  
CRC and Adaptation Scotland plan to provide additional 
support and tools to Public Bodies.
The Council will develop an approach to monitor the impacts 
of climate change including heating and cooling costs as well 
as maintenance and repair costs or buildings and infrastructure.  
Building design and retrofit will need to take this into 
consideration for future climate projections - such as 
researching  future resilience to the impacts of climate 
change. 2022 - 2026
(Long-term 
target of 2045)Corporate; 
Wider 
CommunityRoads and Transportation;
Finance; Regeneration; 
Planning; Energy & 
Compliance; 
Asset Management; GIS; 
Greenspace; Organisation WideClimate Ready Clyde
 
Adaptation Scotland
SEPA
Met Office
Nature Scotland 
Historic Environment 
ScotlandCouncil Capital
Council Revenue
Scottish Government 
funding (various)Will be monitored and reviewed by 
Climate Change Action Group on a regular 
basis.
No monitoring target set until deliverables are 
developed through risk assessment process.
Report to Scottish Government on an annual 
basis through mandatory climate change 
reporting.Climate Impacts, Risk & AdaptationCLIMATE CHANGE ACTION PLAN - TAKING ACTION FOR A NET ZERO FUTUREAction Scope Timescale Focus Service Lead and 
Supporting Service 
AreasStakeholder 
EngagementResourcing Monitoring
Action continued from 
previous page...
The Council undertake an 
internal Climate Risk and 
Vulnerability Assessment to 
both shape the implementation 
of high level actions defined in 
this Climate Change Action Plan 
and inform the development of 
further climate action (i.e. the 
next Climate Change Action 
Plan).With support from CRC and other public bodies, develop a 
financial impacts assessment of Climate Change impacts, and 
highlight required investment needed from Council and other 
funding sources.
With Roads department taking on much of the flooding risk 
assessment, external consultant support will also be required 
to deliver on areas that the Council has no capacity to deliver or 
no internal expertise.
There will be a resource implication of doing risk assessment 
so it will require to be  written into service area/Council 
budgets. No internal capacity to do the risk assessment - 
will need external consultants.2022 - 2026
(Long-term 
target of 2045)Corporate; 
Wider 
CommunityRoads and Transportation;
Finance; Regeneration; 
Planning; Energy & 
Compliance; 
Asset Management; GIS; 
Greenspace; Organisation WideClimate Ready Clyde
 
Adaptation Scotland
SEPA
Met Office
Nature Scotland 
Historic Environment 
ScotlandCouncil Capital
Council Revenue
Scottish Government 
funding (various)Will be monitored and reviewed by 
Climate Change Action Group on a regular 
basis.
No monitoring target set until deliverables are 
developed through risk assessment process.
Report to Scottish Government on an annual 
basis through mandatory climate change 
reporting.
Benchmark the Council against 
Adaptation Scotland’s Adapta -
tion Capability Framework to 
identify current position and 
areas for improvement.Use the Adaptation Capability Framework assessment 
progress to identify where the Council is internally and 
externally against Adaptation.
This is also part of the GCR Adaptation Strategy and therefore 
will help prepare the Council better to deliver on flagship actions 
as part of this.
This exercise links to the Council’s overall Climate Risk and 
Vulnerability Assessment as it will provide a baseline of where 
the Council is internally in it’s ability to deliver on Adaptation, 
including areas of which it needs to improve.2022 - 2023 Corporate; 
Wider 
CommunityEnergy & Compliance
Greenspace; Planning; 
Regeneration; Organisation 
Wide; Climate Ready Clyde
Adaptation Scotland
SnifferWill be developed and monitored by the 
Climate Change Action Group on an annual 
basis.
Report to Scottish Government on an annual 
basis through mandatory climate change 
reporting. CLIMATE CHANGE ACTION PLAN - TAKING ACTION FOR A NET ZERO FUTUREAction Scope Timescale Focus Service Lead and 
Supporting Service 
AreasStakeholder 
EngagementResourcing Monitoring
Ensure all schools achieve 
Eco-Schools Green Flag status 
by 2025.  Increase participation 
in the Eco Schools programme 
via improved local support and 
pilot projects with appointed 
schools.Continue to support, empower and improve education/staff 
and pupil action on Climate Change.
Review current status/baseline of Schools who do not fit this 
criteria, identify ownership and required actions for green flag 
status to be achieved.  Ensure that the Council can aid in supporting 
this transition, i.e. through support from the Greenspace team, etc.
Follow guidelines in order to achieve green flag status, look to 
go beyond current efforts.
More focussed communication and engagement will be required 
with staff and head teachers, in order to empower them to 
inspire school children.
Explore opportunities for using schools as growing places for 
both local food sources and improved biodiversity for supporting 
local wildlife. 2021 - 25 Corporate; 
Wider 
CommunityEducation; Greenspace
Roads; Communications; 
Greenspace; Energy & 
ComplianceKeep Scotland Beautiful
Local CommunityCouncil Capital Will be monitored and reviewed by Climate 
Change Action Group on a regular basis and 
our internal risk management system.
Report to Scottish Government on an annual 
basis through mandatory climate change 
reporting. 
Climate Change and 
Sustainability embedded into 
staff continued personal 
development (CPD) plans, 
ensuring that mandatory 
learning is implemented for 
all new and existing staff.  
This will also involve training for 
Councillors and senior officers.Will require to be included in mandatory inductions and regular 
e-learning CPD plans.
Will get sign-off from Climate Change Action Group and then 
agreed with corporate learning.
With support from Keep Scotland Beautiful (KSB), deliver 
Climate Emergency Training to Councillors and senior officers 
across the Council.2022 - 26
(Long-term 
target of 2045)Corporate Human Resources; 
Energy & Compliance
Communications; Education; 
HSCPKeep Scotland Beautiful Council Capital
Council RevenueWill be made mandatory for all staff inductions 
and regular CPD training on an annual basis.
Will be monitored and reviewed by Climate 
Change Action Group on a regular basis.
Report to Scottish Government on an annual 
basis through mandatory climate change 
reporting.
Review gaps in staff knowledge 
on Climate Change and develop 
training sessions for staff to 
encourage net zero behaviours.Firstly, a strategy and communications plan needs to be 
developed in order to effectively engage with staff.
A baseline needs to be developed of all staff who will require 
training, and then the type of materials and frequency of 
training will be decided.
Staff will be directed to internal or external guidance and 
resources to ensure uptake and to support Green Champions 
when identified.
Alongside the development of engagement materials for our 
Green Champions network, training programmes (such as 
presentations, e-learning modules, toolbox talks, Hints and 
Tips, etc.) will be developed based on the gaps/challenges that 
the Council identifies. 
An internal staff engagement survey will be carried out to 
identify an initial baseline of challenges and knowledge gaps 
on Climate Change.2023 - 26
(Long-term 
target of 2045)Corporate Organisation Wide; 
Communications
Energy & Compliance; Council Capital
Council RevenueWill be monitored and reviewed by 
Climate Change Action Group on a regular 
basis.
Report to Scottish Government on an annual 
basis through mandatory climate change 
reporting. Schools & EducationCLIMATE CHANGE ACTION PLAN - TAKING ACTION FOR A NET ZERO FUTURECLIMATE CHANGE ACTION PLAN - TAKING ACTION FOR A NET ZERO FUTURE
Action Scope Timescale Focus Service Lead and 
Supporting Service 
AreasStakeholder 
EngagementResourcing Monitoring
Develop a Climate Change 
Community Forum to underpin 
more proactive and engaged 
discussions with and climate 
actions by the local community. Review current engagement and relationships  with local 
community groups, Health and Social Care Partnerships (HSCP) 
and the wider public.  With the eventual aim of developing a 
community climate change engagement forum, or similar.
Work with communities team and performance and 
strategy team to review current relationships and develop a 
communications approach that includes all areas of the public.  
This will include developing an internal monitoring approach to 
measure impacts.
This will improve the potential for behaviour change 
interventions for the public, understanding their challenges 
and then informing climate communications and action with 
residents to reduce their carbon footprint (e.g. recycling and 
circular economy practices, active travel, etc.). This could also 
support a long term programme of community outreach and 
engagement to allow residents to feedback on Climate Change.
Ensure equalities and social equity is considered to approach 
and engage all groups such as citizens panel, equality groups, 
faith groups, etc.
Review and support current or future community sharing and 
reuse practices and initiatives,  to reduce domestic and non-
domestic waste and unnecessary consumption.
Undertake focused engagement with communities (including 
faith and equalities groups) about the impact of human actions 
on our environment and climate change to ensure that their 
voices are heard as part of a wider community climate 
conversation.
Engage with local community initiatives and hold engagement 
events with the public, covering all ages.
This will require full support and engagement with the 
communities team and communications team.
Develop and deliver a communications plan for the Climate 
Change Strategy and Action Plan, in order to identify how best 
to engage with and empower local residents.2022-2026
(Long-term 
target of 2045)Wider 
CommunityOrganisation Wide; 
Communities team; 
Performance & Strategy; 
Energy & Compliance; 
Planning; Regeneration; 
Communications; 
Organisation WideSustainable Scotland 
Network (SSN)
Local CommunityCouncil Capital
Council RevenueWill be monitored and reviewed by Climate 
Change Action Group on a regular basis.
Whilst a monitoring approach has yet to 
be identified, by using CCS and Climate 
Change Action Plan themes and actions as a 
framework, the Council will collate feedback 
from residents to inform how the Council will 
better engage the community and deliver on 
climate action that is inclusive of residents.
This thematic approach will then help inform 
future documents, policies and approaches, 
including how we can allocate resources to 
areas that benefit both residents and the 
environment.
Report to Scottish Government on an annual 
basis through mandatory climate change 
reporting. Communities & HealthAction Scope Timescale Focus Service Lead and 
Supporting Service 
AreasStakeholder 
EngagementResourcing Monitoring
Support West Dunbartonshire 
businesses in becoming carbon 
neutral and climate resilient.Regeneration will work with Zero Waste Scotland (ZWS) 
to promote funding opportunities to do a report for local 
businesses. This will provide climate change recommendations 
and then open up potential grant funding from ZWS.
A baseline review of current businesses in Council rented 
storefronts will be carried out.  Highlight those who have not got 
funding.  When this has been collated, a target KPI will be set on 
i) the number of businesses the Council have engaged and ii) the 
number of businesses that have applied for funding and support 
from ZWS.
Must also communicate with businesses not in council rented 
shopfronts to identify appetite for support from ZWS.
This will help increase support and advice to local businesses 
for reducing their environmental impacts, particularly energy, 
waste, water and their associated costs.2021 - 2026
(Long-term 
target of 2045)Corporate; 
Wider 
CommunityRegeneration; 
Energy & Compliance; 
Planning; Organisation WideZero Waste Scotland
Resource Efficient 
Scotland
Local CommunityCouncil Capital
Zero Waste Scotland 
FundingWill be monitored and reviewed by Climate 
Change Action Group on a regular basis.
Report to Scottish Government on an annual 
basis through mandatory climate change 
reporting. 
Will monitor uptake annually using data 
provided by ZWS on West Dunbartonshire 
businesses.  Whilst we cannot measure in 
detail the level of interventions that 
businesses have adopted from ZWS funding, 
we can quantify a basic overview of the 
number of businesses who have received 
support compared to the total amount 
in West Dunbartonshire.  The Council will 
engage with ZWS to improve this metric/
monitoring approach.CLIMATE CHANGE ACTION PLAN - TAKING ACTION FOR A NET ZERO FUTUREAPPENDIX 2
REFERENCES
AND FURTHER
READING
Name Details
Climate Change Strategy: A Route Map for a Net 
Zero Future – West Dunbartonshire Council (2021).Available at: https://www.west-dunbarton.gov.uk/media/4319776/climate-change-strategy.pdf
Glasgow City Region Adaptation Strategy & Action Plan – Climate Ready Clyde (2021).Available at: http://climatereadyclyde.org.uk/adaptation-strategy-and-action-plan/ 
Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis.  Report for Policymakers – IPCC (2021).Available at: https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg1/ 
Climate Change 2014 Synthesis Report Summary for Policymakers – IPCC (2014).Available at: www.ipcc.ch/assessment-report/ar5  
Global Warming of 1.5 °C – IPCC (2018). Available at: www.ipcc.ch/report/sr15/  
State of the UK Climate 2018 Kendon, M., McCarthy, M., Jevrejeva, S., Matthews, A., & Legg, T. (2019). State of the UK climate 2018. International Journal of Climatology, 39, 1-55. Available at: https://rmets.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/joc.6213
UKCP18 Science Overview Report, November 2018 – Met Office (2018).Available at: www.metoffice.gov.uk/pub/data/weather/uk/ukcp18/science-reports/ UKCP18-Overview-report.pdf  
Public Bodies Climate Change Duties: Putting them into Practice – Scottish Government (2011).Available at: beta.gov.scot/publications/public-bodies-cli-mate-change-duties-putting-practice-guidancerequired-part/   
Climate Change Plan: third report on proposals and policies 2018–2032 (RPP3) – Scottish Government (2018).Available at: beta.gov.scot/publications/scottish-governments-climate-change-plan-third-report-proposalspolicies-2018/
Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009 – Scottish Parliament (2009).Available at: www.legislation.gov.uk/asp/2009/12/contents  
Climate Change (Emissions Reduction Targets) (Scotland) Act 2019 – Scottish Parliament (2019)Available at: www.legislation.gov.uk/asp/2019/15/enacted  
Switched On Scotland Phase Two: An Action Plan For Growth – Transport Scotland (2017).Available at: www.transport.gov.scot/media/39306/switched-on-scotland-phase-2.pdf
Copenhagen Accord, COP 15 (2009) The Copenhagen Accord is a document which delegates at the 15th session of the Conference of Parties (COP 15) to the United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change agreed to “take note of” at 
the final plenary on 18 December 2009. The Accord is not legally binding and does not commit countries to agree to a binding successor to the Kyoto Protocol, whose round ended in 2012.
Paris Accord, COP 21 (2015) Update to COP 15. Under the Paris Agreement, each country must determine, plan, and regularly report on the contribution that it undertakes to mitigate global warming.
Poland Accord, COP 24 (2018) Update to COP 21
2030 Climate and Energy Framework 2014 (revised in 2018)The 2030 climate and energy framework include EU-wide targets and policy objectives for the period from 2021 to 2030.
Energy Efficiency Directive (2016) Establishes a set of binding measures to help the EU reach its 20% energy efficiency target by 2020
EU Adaptation Strategy In 2013, the European Commission adopted an EU strategy on adaptation to climate change, welcomed by the EU Member States. The strategy aims to make Europe more climate resilient.
Energy Performance of Buildings Directive (2018) It includes measures that will accelerate the rate of building renovation towards more energy efficient systems and strengthen the energy performance of new buildings, making them smarter.
Climate Change Act 2009 The Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009 is an Act of the Scottish Parliament. The Act includes an emissions target, set for the year 2050, for a reduction of at least 80% from the baseline year, 1990. Annual targets for greenhouse gas emissions must also be set, after consultation the relevant advisory bodies.APPENDIX 2 - REFERENCES AND FURTHER READINGName Details
RPP3 (2018-2032) Climate Change Plan: third report on proposals and policies 2018-2032 
(RPP3)
This plan sets out the path to a low carbon economy while helping to 
deliver sustainable economic growth and secure the wider benefits to a 
greener, fairer and healthier Scotland in 2032.f
Climate Change Act 2019 The Climate Change (Emissions Reduction Targets) (Scotland) Act 2019, 
which amends the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009, sets targets 
to reduce Scotland’s emissions of all greenhouse gases to net-zero by 
2045 at the latest, with interim targets for reductions of at least 56% by 
2020, 75% by 2030, 90% by 2040. 
Scotland’s Energy Strategy Scotland’s first energy strategy sets out the Scottish Government’s 
vision for the future energy system in Scotland.
National Transport Strategy The National Transport Strategy (NTS2) sets out an ambitious and 
compelling vision for Scotland’s transport system for the next 20 years. 
There are four priorities to support that vision
Zero Waste Plan 2010 doc, self-explanatory
Energy Strategy - Scotland’s Energy Efficiency 
Programme (SEEP)The 15 to 20 year programme is the cornerstone of Scottish 
government’s approach to energy efficiency, a National Infrastructure 
Priority.
Climate Change (Duties of Public Bodies: 
Reporting Requirements)The statute under which the mandatory climate change reporting 
framework sits under
National Planning Framework Policy 4 The National Planning Framework 4 will help promote sustainable 
and inclusive economic growth across all of regions, and to create 
high-quality, diverse and sustainable places that promote wellbeing 
and attract investment.
Energy Efficiency Scotland Route Map This route map for the Energy Efficient Scotland programme sets out 
the journey our homes, businesses and public buildings will take to 
become more energy efficient.
Fuel Poverty Bill The target is that in the year 2040, as far as reasonably possible 
no household in Scotland is in fuel poverty and, in any event -
(a)no more than 5% of households in Scotland are in fuel poverty,
(b)no more than 1% of households in Scotland are in extreme fuel 
poverty,
(c)the median fuel poverty gap of households in Scotland in fuel poverty 
is no more than £250
Climate Ready Scotland: Climate Change 
Adaptation Program 2019-2024A five year programme to prepare Scotland for the challenges we will 
face as our climate continues to change.APPENDIX 2 - REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING