1
ENVIRONMENT OVERVIEW & SCRUTINY COMMITTEE
24TH SEPTEMBER 2019
REPORT TITLE UPDATE ON THE COUNCIL’S RESPONSE  TO THE 
CLIMATE EMERGENCY DECLARATION
REPORT OF Mike Cockburn – Lead Commissioner for Environment
REPORT SUMMARY
This report  provides Committee  with an update on the Council’s response the Environment 
and Climate Emergency Declaration of July 2019. The Council has  renewed its 
commitment to tackling  the causes of climate change for some years. However,  the 
resolution of July 2019 to declare a climate emergency, which received all party support,  is 
a significant move  and requires the Council to reset its corporate priorities in order to 
address the requirements  of the climate emergency resolution. Through  the Climate 
Emergency resolution, the Council  is committing to  do all in its power and influence  for 
Wirral to be carbon neutral  by 2050 and is now developing a Climate Emergency Action 
Plan, which will set out the framework for developing and establishing this.  
In order to ensure  a quick  response to the emergency declaration, the Council  has 
established an initiating action plan,  to deliver quick actions and at the same time put in 
place the framework and clarification of responsibilities that  will drive  the Climate 
Emergency Action Plan.
This report  provides Committee  with an update on the initiating  action plan, the actions 
that have  been achieved and are being  put in place. The Climate Emergency  Declaration 
and carbon neutral target will require  all our partners to commit to  the declaration, deliver 
their own plans  and work together in partnership to drive  major  change for Wirral.  The 
Wirral Climate Change Partnership  have  renewed the Cool  Wirral Strategy for all partners 
to jointly implement, following extensive joint preparation work this year. The updated Cool 
Wirral Strategy is currently being  prepared to go out to public consultation for 
establishment this year. 
Emphasis is also being placed on urging everyone in Wirral  to acknowledge  the climate 
emergency and commit to making  the necessary changes  to the way they live their lives or 
operate their businesses in order to make the necessary changes. The Council and its 
partners within the Cool Wirral Partnership  will help people to  make changes to their lives 
by providing advice  and support  to their activities.   
This matter affects all Wards  within  the Borough.2RECOMMENDATIONS
Committee is recommended  to:
1.Note the contents of this report  and the steps being taken to respond to the Climate  
Emergency Declaration.
2. Provide the Cabinet Member for Environment  and Climate Change with comments  
on the Climate Emergency Declaration response.3SUPPORTING INFORMATION
1.0 REASONS  FOR RECOMMENDATIONS
The Council has declared an environment and climate emergency in recognition of the 
urgent need to take action to address global warming and the crisis being  created by 
unavoidable climate change. The Council has committed  to making climate  the emergency 
a top corporate priority,  realigning  responsibilities  and resources  and establishing a long-
term climate  emergency action plan to help tackle climate change and  enable Wirral to be  
carbon neutral by 2050. 
In order to respond quickly  to the climate  emergency declaration and prepare for the 
establishment of the Climate Emergency Action  Plan, the Council  has established an 
initiating action plan, a summary  of which is attached,  see Appendix 1. Committee will be 
provided with an update  on progress with this plan and  preparations  for the Climate 
Emergency Action Plan.      
2.0 OTHER OPTIONS CONSIDERED
This report  provides Committee  with an update on the Council’s response to the 
Environment and Climate Emergency declaration. Since the declaration  was made, initial 
plans have been developed to put in place the framework that  will enable the Council  to 
implement the required changes and realignment of responsibilities. However, the Council 
will consider  all options when developing the Climate Emergency  Action Plan for Wirral  to 
be carbon neutral by 2050 and be resilient to unavoidable climate  change. Committee will 
be further updated on the options considered for the plan  and its impact  once 
implemented.   
3.0     BACKGROUND  INFORMATION
3.1    Climate Emergency  Declaration  July 2019
Wirral Council declared an Environment  and Climate Emergency in July 2019. Through  the 
resolution made at the Council meeting of 15 July, the Council welcomed Parliament’s  UK 
Climate Emergency  Declaration of May 1st. The Council also welcomed the United  
Nation’s Climate Action Summit, taking place this month  following the publication of the 
IPCC and IPBES reports. The Council’s resolution also recognised  the overwhelming 
scientific consensus  that global  emissions will need to fall by around 45% from 2010 levels 
by 2030, reaching  net zero by around  2050 in order to  avoid more than a 1.5°C rise in 
global warming.
Through the resolution the Council recognised the need to support the Climate Emergency 
Declaration with the required realignment of responsibilities and the delivery of practical 
local action.  A summary of the measures and actions from the climate emergency 
resolution is set out below: 
In order to progress a meaningful response to reforestation and  to the development  
of sustainable  agriculture, Cabinet  is requested to ask that the Government, as part 4of the forthcoming Spending Review,  provides additional funding  for schemes that 
will bring this about. 
Council therefore  requests that, as a significant practical step to slow the build-up 
of carbon dioxide  (CO 2) in the atmosphere, Cabinet is requested  to ask officers to  
initiate a major  tree-planting  initiative, ensuring that  they discuss the opportunities  
for additional tree planting in Wirral  with the major landowners, identify land  for tree 
planting to create a range of sites and wildlife corridors and add to  the biodiversity 
of Wirral and involve local schools. 
Further, Council requests that officers work with local landowners, agents and the 
farming community to increase  the scope  for the Environmental Land  Management 
contracts suggested by the Rt Hon Michael  Gove MP to the Oxford Farming 
Conference in January 2019.  
Council supports a drive to localise food production and asks Cabinet to support 
the uptake and maintenance  of allotments,  offering advice and support  to residents  
to take on an allotment. 
Recognising the need to progress the switch to electric  powered cars, Council 
urges Cabinet to work with  large employers,  the Chamber of Commerce and other  
organisations to promote and secure the provision of more charging  points for 
electric vehicles across Wirral. 
Council recalls that at its meeting on 18 March  2019, members  voted unanimously 
to ask Cabinet to explore the possibility of building  its own solar farm. 
Set senior leadership responsibilities across  all departments to reflect that the 
climate emergency relates to all aspects of the Council's activities. 
Prioritise  the climate  emergency  as part of a wider partnership ensuring the Cool 
Wirral initiative has clear reporting links with other  strategic partners. 
Implement  a long-term climate  emergency communication programme including a 
dedicated web site and a dedicated  mailing  list to build a network of interest  groups.
Adopt appropriate decision-making tools supported by a staff and  member training 
programme. 
The reintroduction of environmental and climate impacts in committee report  
templates. 
The reinstatement  of carbon budget reports.
Robust carbon/sustainability appraisals for all significant plans and strategies and 
Establish a cross  - department  task group to draw  up the Council’s Climate  
Emergency Action Plan.
3.2      Second Climate Change Strategy  – ‘Cool Wirral 2’
The Climate  Change  Strategy for Wirral (Cool Wirral) has been  renewed by the Wirral  
Climate Change Partnership and is being prepared by public consultation, prior to  being 
launched this year.  The initial  Climate Change ‘Cool Wirral’ Strategy was established in 
2014 by the Partnership and endorsed by the Council as a member of  the partnership and 
to confirm its commitment to tackling climate change. The Cool Wirral  Strategy was 
established to run for 5 years  from 2014 to 2019 and each year since  the Council has 
reaffirmed this commitment  through the Local  Government Association’s Climate Local  5Declaration initiative.  As part of this the Environment Overview & Scrutiny Committee have 
received an update  of progress with delivery of the strategy’s  actions. 
The initial Climate Change Strategy concludes this year and  therefore the Wirral Climate  
Change Partnership has been reviewing and updating the strategy.  Through the updated 
strategy the Partnership fully acknowledge  the Climate Emergency Declaration  and the 
updated strategy sets out the strategic direction and required change for Wirral  to be 
carbon neutral by 2050 in line with the declaration. The Climate Change ‘Cool Wirral 2’  
Strategy is due to go to public consultation this autumn before being launched  later this 
year.   
3.3     Response to the Climate Emergency Declaration  
The Council is developing a Climate Emergency  Action  Plan to  address the commitments 
and requirements of the resolution  passed in July 2019. The Action Plan will set  out the 
long-term direction for the Council  and provide a route map for the changes  required to 
address climate pollution to enable Wirral  to become carbon  neutral  and resilient  to 
unavoidable changes  to the climate. 
In order to quickly  respond to the Climate  Emergency  Declaration and establish  the 
framework for developing the Climate  Emergency Action Plan, officers  have established  
an initiating action  plan.  A summary of the initiating action plan  is set out in Appendix 1.   
The Council is making  progress with the actions  set out in the initiating plan  and the 
position is evolving and developing quickly.  The following are highlights of what  has been 
actioned or is currently being planned as part of the plan.  
3.3.1 Awareness and Understanding of Climate Emergency 
In declaring  a climate  emergency, the Council  has made tackling  climate change  a 
corporate priority and Climate Emergency  Action Plan will reflect  this. Therefore, it is 
crucial that everyone  connected with the Council has a full understanding of why a climate 
emergency has been declared and what is required in order to respond  to it. The Climate 
Emergency Declaration resolution makes  clear that everyone has a responsibility for 
delivering the requirements  of the Climate Emergency Action Plan and must understand 
this responsibility. Therefore,  an important early  action in  response to the declaration is for 
everyone to receive briefing and advice on climate emergency and its implications. This 
will enable  the planning and realignment  exercises to be undertaken  across the Council 
and specifically for the all-party  taskforce to be established.
The following events are scheduled or being planned to raise understanding  of climate  
emergency:
Cabinet and the Council’s senior  management team (SMT) are  attending  a climate 
emergency workshop focusing on the use of the SCATTER tool (Setting City Area 
Targets and Trajectories for Emissions  Reduction) on 16th September.   
It is proposed that all Council Members will attend SCATTER tool  workshops.
Senior officers will attend  a climate emergency event this autumn to develop the 
Council’s Climate Emergency  Action Plan.
A climate emergency briefing programme will be developed for all Council  staff.    
The Council’s reporting template  is being  amended so that  the environment  and 
climate implications  of all recommendations or officer advice are  set out.  6The establishment of a Climate Emergency Team, which includes a dedicated 
graduate placement  for climate emergency,  to coordinate the 100-day  action plan 
and establishment of the Climate Emergency Action Plan.
3.3.2 Community Support and Engagement
The Council is developing public awareness  campaign on  climate emergency and to offer 
support to residents wanting advice  on how to take action. A climate emergency task 
group has been established to drive the public awareness campaign. This will include the 
following: 
The establishment of a dedicated Climate Emergency website.  
Climate emergency information  to be available at all Council events  and meetings.
The Eco Schools  programme will be overhauled  to address climate  emergency. 
3.3.3 New Strategies and Policies to Support Climate Emergency Action Plan 
The Council is developing a range of new policies and strategies that will form important  
elements of the Climate  Emergency  Action Plan, these  include the following:
Tree Strategy will set out a commitment  to planting  trees to increase Wirral’s tree 
canopy cover, the strategy is due to go out to public consultation.
Report to Cabinet on recommendations for using sustainability appraisal  to improve 
decision making.
Policy for encouraging pollinators  and wildflowers along hedges  and verges. 
Review and update  the Council’s procurement policy to reflect the climate  
emergency.
Proposals for developing electric vehicle charging provision.
3.3.4 Urging Partners to Declare Climate Emergencies  and Pledge Action
The Council recognises  that addressing climate  emergency cannot be achieved in 
isolation and requires  full collaboration and a joint approach from all partner organisations.  
Therefore, as part of the Climate Emergency Action Plan all partner organisations will be  
urged to commit  to climate emergency declarations and  make pledges for action.  As part 
of the development of the Climate Emergency  Action Plan it is intended to hold a climate  
emergency summit of partners to plan joint approaches  and pledge  action.   
The Council will also work with other Liverpool City Region  authorities on climate  
emergency and with the Mayor to deliver  regional environmental and climate priorities.    
4.0     FINANCIAL  IMPLICATIONS
There are financial implications to declaring  a climate emergency and setting  a new 
corporate priority for the Council.  Therefore,  as part of the process for developing the 
Climate Emergency  Action  Plan, an assessment of the funding requirements for the 
delivery identified  actions and commitments will be undertaken.    75.0     LEGAL IMPLICATIONS 
There are no direct legal implications of this update to Committee on the response  to the 
Climate Emergency  Declaration.
6.0     RESOURCE IMPLICATIONS: ICT, STAFFING  AND ASSETS
There are resource  implications to declaring a climate emergency and setting a new 
corporate priority for the Council.  The process  for developing  the Climate Emergency 
Action Plan will identify  areas of responsibility,  new resources  requirements or 
realignments.  
7.0     RELEVANT RISKS 
The Council’s corporate risk register  is being  amended to reflect the climate emergency 
declaration and the reasons  behind it in terms of the risk climate disaster has on  the 
Council, Wirral as a place and its residents.  The Climate Emergency  Action Plan and 
working jointly with partner organisations and residents will form the mitigation to such  risk. 
8.0    ENGAGEMENT/CONSULTATION 
There will be public consultation delivered as part of the development of climate  
emergency related strategies such as the Tree Strategy and the Wirral  Climate Change 
Partnership’s Cool Wirral 2 Climate Change Strategy.
Work will be undertaken as part of the development of the Climate Emergency Action Plan 
to identify approaches to ongoing resident and stakeholder engagement on climate 
emergency issues.
9.0    EQUALITY IMPLICATIONS
An Equality  Impact Assessment will be undertaken as part of the development of the 
Climate Emergency  Action  Plan.  
10.0 ENVIRONMENT AND CLIMATE IMPLICATIONS
The Climate  Emergency  Declaration  was resolved with all party support at Council in  July 
due to extreme concern about  the impact  of climate change and the urgent need for 
action. This report provides Committee  with an update on the Council’s response  to the 
declaration and progress with the development of the Climate  Emergency Action  plan  
called for as part of the declaration. Therefore,  the actions and planning set out in this 
progress report  are designed to have a positive  effect  on the environment and climate.
In future all reports and briefing notes  produced on behalf  of the Council will set out the 
environmental and climate implications of the recommendations or advice being put 
forward. 
The content and recommendations contained  within this report are expected to:
-Reduce emissions of CO2             8REPORT AUTHOR: Mike Cockburn
Lead Commissioner - Environment
telephone:  0151 606 2453
email:  mikecockburn@wirral.gov.uk;   
APPENDICES
Appendix 1 – Summary  of the Climate Emergency Initiating Action  Plan
BACKGROUND PAPERS
SUBJECT HISTORY  (last 3 years)
Council Meeting Date
Extraordinary meeting  – Environment  and Climate 
Emergency. 15 July 20199APPENDIX 1 - SUMMARY OF THE CLIMATE  EMERENCY INITIATING ACTION PLAN
1Update corporate carbon reduction target to reflect the Tyndall Centre for 
Climate Change’s recent recommendations that Wirral needs to  eliminate CO 2 
pollution by 2041 at the latest. 
2Agree process to set senior leadership climate emergency responsibility  and 
accountability across all Council  services.
3Launch public consultation  on the Cool Wirral Partnership’s new climate  change 
strategy (Cool 2). 
4 Report to Cabinet to recommend the endorsement  of the Cool Wirral  2 strategy.
5Commence review of the Council’s environment  policy to reflect the climate  
emergency.
6 Commence action to make the Council's operations and  services ‘paperless.’
7Agree mechanism and format to re-establish  annual Council carbon budget 
reporting. 
8Introduce a revised energy management system based on  the re-established 
carbon budget.
9Set ambitious short-term targets for the further  roll-out of renewables and low 
carbon energy across  the Council estate.
10Continue programme to upgrade the Council's remaining street lighting stock to 
LED lamps.
11Prepare a report for the Council on proposals  for developing  electric  vehicle 
charging provision.
12 Conduct a cycle audit  of all council premises.
13Commence a pilot exercise to extend  the use of electric  vehicles across  the 
Council’s fleet, as well as for a feasibility  study into utilising  pedal-powered and 
electric-assist pedal-powered vehicles for local travel needs.  1014Ensure that the environment  and climate implications of all committee  decisions 
are considered by amending the Council report template to  include an  
‘environment and climate implications’  section.
15Report to Cabinet on recommendations for using a sustainability appraisal to  
improve decision making. 
16Review and update  the Council’s purchasing policy to reflect the realities of 
responding to the climate emergency.
17Commission an investigation to identify  initiatives to enable the planning system 
and Local Plan to assist  in the Council’s response to the climate  emergency. 
18Review the Council’s catering  and food contracts to reduce meat consumption 
and expand vegetarian and vegan  options.
19Review recycling facilities at all Council locations and establish  required 
infrastructure to support improvements.
20Support partners from the community and social  housing providers to develop 
and operate projects  to enable reuse  and repair  of furniture and  other bulky 
items.
21In partnership with MRWA, conduct a pilot and feasibility study regarding the 
introduction of additional materials to the kerbside recycling service.
22 Establish a tree strategy following a consultation exercise.
23 Submit a bid to the Urban Tree Fund.
24 Initiate a major tree-planting initiative across Wirral.
25Amend the Council’s corporate risk management  strategy to  reflect the climate  
emergency and its implications for the way the Council functions  and delivers  
services.
26Deliver a climate emergency workshop for the Council’s Senior  Leadership Team  
and Cabinet utilising  the SCATTER emissions reduction model.
27Encourage Council Members and staff to make  public pledges of personal 
commitment to take action in response  to the climate emergency.1128Update the Council’s website and intranet  to reflect the climate emergency 
declaration and 100-day Action Plan and provide a clear list of actions residents  
can take in response to the climate emergency.
29Establish a network of Environment and Climate Emergency Champions within  
the Council’s workforce.
30Create a Climate  Emergency promotion  resource  pack and equipment for 
utilisation as part of community events and roadshows. 
31Mobilise the Eco Schools scheme to help schools address the climate  
emergency.
32Develop and launch a climate emergency communications strategy  and 
programme to explain to the public what the climate emergency declaration  
means and promote understanding  and action.
33Develop and launch a climate emergency staff training programme and  
information roadshow.  
34Deliver climate emergency training  workshops for all Council  members utilising  
the SCATTER  emissions reduction model.
35The Council Leader to write to the Prime Minister requesting additional powers 
and funds to address the environment and climate emergency. 
36Establish a cross-party climate emergency  task group to provide strategic  
leadership and oversee the development of the Climate Emergency Action  Plan.  
37Direct the Council’s climate emergency  task group to urge all partner 
organisations to declare a climate  emergency  and identify and implement 
required action.
38Report to Cabinet on capturing the economic  opportunities and  green jobs that 
can be realised  through a low carbon economy.
39Deliver an all Council service planning event  for senior  officers and  heads of 
service to plan and develop the Climate Emergency Action Plan. 
40Conduct research  and produce a plan on planting in areas in the Wirral to attract  
pollinators with specific emphasis on: cost and maintenance; advice on  suitable  
areas; area for suitable trial; and, proposals  for consultation regarding  further 
areas where  this could  be introduced.
41Utilise the Graduate Programme to introduce more staff resources  to the 
Council’s climate emergency response.1242Participate in the Wirral Earth  Festival to raise  awareness of the climate  
emergency.