 
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document         
 Page | 1  
  
  
 
July 2021  
 
Wokingham Borough Council  
Climate Emergency Action Plan  
 
Second Progress Report  
 
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document         
 Page | 2  
 Content s  
 
 
Foreword  
Introduction  
The Changing Lands cape  
Overview and Scrutiny  
A Year in Numbers  
Current Emissions Profile  
Targets and Estimated Carbon Savings  
Wokingham Borough Council’s Carbon Footprint as 
an Organisation  
Climate Emergency Action Plan 
Appendix 1. Data Sources  
Appendix 2. Glossary   
Appendix 3. Sustainable Development Goals  
Appendix 4. Carbon Accounting Methodology & 
Assumptions
 
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 3   Foreword  
 
The climate emergency we are facing is not just of our own making, it is the effect 
of all human created emissions throughout history.  Today, we are at 1.2 degrees 
of warming and already witnessing unprecedented climate extremes and volatility 
in every region and on every continent. We are headed for a dramatic  temperature 
rise of 3 to 5 degrees Celsius this century[1]. 
  
This global warming trend stretches back many decades. The signs of an 
acceleration in  warming are clear, 2020 was the hottest year on record so far, 
bookending  the hottest decade worldwide[2].  
  
Our horizon for meaningful action is shrinking. Our climate and ecological 
emergencies are accelerating faster than expected, threatening humanity and the 
world’s natural ecosystems. We are seeing an increased frequency and magnitude 
for extreme weather events from droughts, heatwaves, flooding, winter storms, 
hurricanes, and wildfires[3].   
  
Our future response must exceed the totality of our collective emissions. In 
October 2018, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) report set 
out the dire consequences if humanity fails to limit warming to 1.5˚C – on our 
health, economy and our lives. Effectively, the IPCC report said that the world had 
just 12 years to get a grip o f the problem or face irreparable damage.  
  
In response to this, The UK adopted The Paris Agreement in November 2016, and 
has committed to  reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 100% by 2050. In April 2021,  
the government announced a new climate change commitment which will set the 
UK on course to cut carbon emissions by 78% by 2035. Today, over 300 District, 
County, Unitary & Metropolitan Counc ils have declared a Climate Emergency 
accounting for 74% of authorities in the UK[4].  
  
The COVID -19 pandemic global lockdowns have temporarily reduced emissions and 
pollution. But carbon dioxide levels are still at record high – and rising. In 2019, 
carbon dioxide levels reached 148 per cent of pre -industrial levels.  In 2020, th is 
upward tre nd has continued despite the pandemic , making the next decade 
critically important. As we overcome the pandemic, there is an opportunity to reshape the world economy, transforming it into a mechanism for a sustainable 
future.  
  
Over the last year, the UK G overnment has introduced more ambitious strategies 
to support the decarbonisation targets ; while growing the economy and creating 
new, long -term green jobs. The Industrial Decarbonisation Strategy, The North Sea 
Transition Deal, The 10 Point Plan for a green industrial revolution, and The Energy 
White Paper aim to help the UK’s trajectory towar ds meeting the new sixth Carbon 
Budget. At the same time UK Government has also announced its objective to end 
the sale of new petrol and diesel cars in the UK by 2030; and we are expecting to 
see the Transport Decarbonisation Plan and the Heating and Buil ding Strategy over 
the next few months.   
  
The strengthening of national climate policies over the last 12 months is a welcome 
development, however, there is still much more needed for the UK to successfully 
reach its target of net -zero emissions by 2050. The scale of the challenge is colossal, 
and everyone needs to play a role in tackling climate change, bringing together 
businesses, organisations and the public is vital to reach the climate change goals. 
The world as we know it is changing significantly, and we all have a responsibility 
to meet the challenge.  
  
The cost of climate change action is outweighed by the significant benefits which 
will result from our actions, policies and investment. By taking action we will reduce 
pollution, generate fuel savings, enhance biodiversity, and support economic 
growth. Re aching net -zero will create jobs and trade but that transition to a green 
economy requires a workforce with the right skills - and that is also a problem we 
face.  
 
 
 
 
 
[1] State of the Planet speech, United Nations Secretary General Antonio Guterres. December 2020  
[2] World Meteorological Organisation  
[3] Facts about the Climate Emergenc y, UN Environment Programme   
[4] https://www.climateemergency.uk/blog/list -of-councils/  
 
  
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 4    
 
Introduction  
 
In response to the rising concern over the urgent need for action, in July 2019, 
Wokingham Borough Council members unanimously declared a climate 
emergency. The declaration set out the commitment to play as full a role as 
possible, leading by example as well as by exhortation, in achieving a carbon 
neutral Wokingham Borough by 2030. Subsequently, in January 2020, the council 
published its first Clim ate Emergency Action Plan, establishing the eight key priority 
areas to focus on for reducing CO 2.  
  
In July 2020, an annual report was presented to Council which detailed targets and 
actions that needed to be undertaken to reach the 2030 net -zero carbon target. In 
order to quantify the magnitude of the challenge and the level of commitment 
needed, we used trajectories and best estimates to quantify the carbon savings 
generated by the delivery of the actions and achieving the proposed targets. A 
short fall  of 67.18 ktCO2e was identified, which provides a clear picture for the 
scale of the approach that is needed.  
  
This Climate Emergency Action Plan Second Progress Report presents a costed -up 
action plan with carbon saving targets against individual project s, where possible. 
The report summarises the Borough’s plans for the years ahead and demonstrates 
the benefits of becoming net zero. These actions will be delivered over the next ten 
years; however, some actions will be delivered sooner than others, and ca rbon 
savings will be achieved following the implementation of each target and in some 
cases further down the line.  
  
Most of the actions to be delivered over the first few years set in motion the 
groundwork and foundations for new strategies and policies that will influence our 
way of life locally. The biggest gains are expected to come towards the end of the 
decade after most of the actions have come to fruition. Short term actions can be 
achieved within two or three years (2020 -2023), medium term actions  are designed 
to take several years to reach fulfilment (2024 to 2028), and longer -term actions 
will take many years to come to fruition (2028 to 2030).  
  Despite the Council’s best efforts, the achievement of the targets established by 
this action plan relies on the engagement and support of our residents, 
communities, local towns and parish councils, and local businesses. These partners 
will not only help us to deliver but will take the responsibility for achieving targets 
to help close the gap.  
  
We need to be agile to a dynamic landscape and anticipate that new actions and 
initiatives will be introduced over the coming years, which will enable us to close 
the shortfall identified. Targets and actions within this plan will change and develop 
over t ime. It is equally possible that expectations may have to be revised 
downwards.  Therefore, the Council has committed to continually revisit targets, to 
tweak, adjust or even entirely re -evaluate them in line with actual progress, new 
policies, and global e vents that might affect the climate emergency agenda.  
 
Furthermore, t he council recognises the importance of the United Nations’ SDGs 
and aligned  the key areas of action within the Climate Emergency Action Plan to 
the SDG framework. In doing so, the counc il hopes to ensure that its actions 
contribute to global level action and lead to a socially just response to tackling 
climate change.  
 
To ensure we are on track to reach these goals and that each project is working 
effectively, they will each be closely monitored, with a RAG rating system in place 
to provide clarity. Here each target has been assigned a colour based on the 
standard RAG system, where green represents being on track to being achieved, 
yellow indicates currently being slightly delayed or bei ng depending on delivery of 
previous milestones, red indicates being delayed or cancelled and grey means it 
has not yet been started.  
 
The annual climate emergency progress report will be published each year in July.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 5    
 
 
The Changing Landscape  
  
The last twelve months have been volatile, and although we have seen much 
disruption it has brough t opportunities for change. It has sped up innovation in 
working practices and it has created greater focus on technology and the financial 
systems that under pin society. We have been compelled to adopt new behaviours, 
which have influenced the way we see the future and what is possible. A summary 
of these events and how they affect the climate emergency response is outlined  
below:  
  
Coronavirus - COVID 19 Global Pandemic  
The pandemic has caused global social and economic disruption, dramatic loss to 
human life worldwide, unprecedented challenges to public health, food systems 
and the world of work in addition to the largest global recession since the Great 
Depression, according to the International  Monetary  Fund (IMF). However, one 
rare positive to emerge from the periods of lockdown in 2020 and 2021 has been 
a drop in global greenhouse gas emissions and improvements to air quality, 
primarily because of a si gnificant reduction in transport. The pandemic is the 
biggest shock to the global energy system, with annual predicted decline in carbon 
emissions of almost 8%.  
  
In Wokingham, changes to the way we work, and travel will pose challenges and 
opportunities as we transition to net zero. More home working will mean lower 
emissions from road transport, but higher emissions from our homes, as we heat 
and cool many different working spaces over the summer and winter months. 
Increased walking and cycling will brin g many benefits to the environment and 
public health, but the shift from public transport to private cars can have a negative 
medium -term impact.   
  
The pandemic’s long -term effect on individual behaviours, economic activity and 
energy use around the worl d are unclear. However, one thing that is certain is that 
more large -scale actions are essential to avoid the worst impacts of climate change.  
  
 Green Economy  
The recovery from the coronavirus has been framed as a green recovery by the UK 
government whic h has committed £11 billion of subsidies. The green recovery 
focuses on policies which will benefit the economy as well as the planet and will 
require reforms in several sectors. The UK public overwhelmingly supports a green 
recovery with nearly 75% saying  that this is a once -in-a-lifetime opportunity to 
tackle climate change.  
  
In July 2020, Mr Johnson announced that UK industry would receive around £350 
million to cut down carbon emissions under new plans to step up efforts to tackle 
climate change.[1] The package of funding is targeted at the heavy industry, 
construction, space and transp ort sectors by helping businesses to decarbonise 
across these sectors and secure the UK’s place at the forefront of green innovation.  
  
Ten Point Plan for a Green Industrial Revolution  
With the key objectives of Building Back Better, supporting green jobs and 
accelerating the UK’s path to net zero, the Government’s 10 -point plan committed 
to mobilise £12 billion of government spending and up to £42 billion in private 
sector investment to create 250,000 green jobs. The plan introduced several 
upcoming policy  documents such as the Energy White Paper, the National Bus 
Strategy and the England Tree Strategy. The ten points cover plans to advance 
renewable energy production, invest in more sustainable transport options, 
retrofitting buildings, investing in carbon  capture, usage,  and storage (CCUS) a s 
well as  protecting our natural environment.  
  
The Ban on the Sale  of New Petrol and Diesel Vehicles  
In November 2020, the Government announced the end of the sale of new petrol 
and diesel cars in the UK by 2030. The 2 -phased approach will see the phase -out 
date for the sale of new petrol and diesel cars and vans brought forward to 2030 
and a target for all new cars and vans to be fully zero emission at the tailpipe from 
2035. 
  
Between 2030 and 2035, new cars and vans can be sold if they have the capability 
to drive a significant distance with zero emissions (for example, plug -in hybrids or 
full hybrids), and this will be defined through consultation.  
  
  
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 6   The Sixth Carbon Budget Report  
On the 9th of December 2020 , the UK Climate Change Committee released its Sixth 
Carbon Budget report which included several  subset reports and 
recommendations. The report identifies how local authorities can support the 
implementation of the Sixth Carbon Budget through the following c ore areas of 
delivery: Buildings, Transport, Waste, Electricity Generation, Land use, Land -use 
change and Forestry and Agriculture.  
  
Local authorities have a range of existing levers that can be used to deliver local 
action that reduces emissions and pre pares local areas to a changing climate. 
However, these levers alone are unlikely to be sufficient to deliver local authorities’ 
Net Zero ambitions, due to gaps in powers, policy and funding barriers, and a lack 
of capacity and skills at a local level.  
 
The Climate Change Committee (CCC) published an accompanying report on the 
role of local authorities in delivering the UK’s Net Zero ambition. The report aims 
to provide a framework for aligning climate action at the local level with the CCC’s 
pathways for the UK, as well as recommendations for local, regional and national 
Governments aiming to remove barriers to delivering local climate action in the UK.  
  
Future Homes Standards  
The Government responded to a consultation on the Future Home Standards to 
ensure the ability for Local Plans, the document which set s out a council’s planning 
policy, to set higher energy performance standards for all new homes. The 
government has set out plans to radically improve the energy performance of new 
homes, with low carbon heating and be zero carbon ready by 2025.  
 
These hom es are expected to produce 75 -80% lower carbon emissions compared 
to current levels. To ensure industry is ready to meet the new standards by 2025, 
new homes will be expected to produce 31% lower carbon emissions from 2021. 
Existing homes will also be subj ect to higher standards – with a significant 
improvement on the standard for extensions, making homes warmer and reducing 
bills. 
  
Environment Bill  
Most of the UK’s environmental laws are derived from the EU environmental 
framework which is renowned as on e of the strongest in the world. The Environment Bill, currently going through Parliament, will b ring new environmental 
legislation aimed at filling the governance gap created by Brexit.  
  
The Environment Bill brings about urgent and meaningful action to combat the 
environmental and climate crises we are facing and acts as a key vehicle for 
delivering the bold vision set out in the 25 Year Environment Plan. It will support 
the country’s desire to build back better after Covid -19 with measures that support 
both economic growth and the government’s manifesto.  
   
The Energy White Paper  
In December 2020, The Government published The Energy White Paper that sets 
the wider stage for the net -zero target and marks the start of a critical period that 
will see the g overnment launch numerous consultations and strategies ahead of 
hosting the COP26 climate summit later this year.  
 
The paper sets out the changes which will be required  to transform our energy 
system, promoting high -skilled jobs and clean, resilient economic growth as the UK 
deliver s net-zero emissions by 2050 . We will reduce emissions through shifting  
from gas to electricity to heat our homes  and by better insulating the b uildings in  
which we live and work .  
 
Our experiences as energy consumers will be very  different. Smart technologies are 
revolutionising  how we can engage the market. Smart meters  and a range of smart 
appliances, backed by  new smart tariffs, will give us c ontrol about  how we use 
energy and help us manage  our bills – running the washing machine or  charging 
the electric vehicle when demand  is low and electricity is cheap, even selling  
surplus power back to the grid at a profit.  
 
Bus Back Better  
The National Bus Strategy for England was published in March 2021, this 
established the importance to shift back from private vehicle to bus quickly  
following the COVID 19 Pandemic recovery . The strategy commits to provide 
funding to support improvements to  the quantity and quality of the service  and 
establishes the need for partnerships between local councils and bus operators  to 
deliver The Local Bus Service Improvement Plans .  
 
  
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 7   The 26th UN Climate Change Conference of the Parties (COP 26 ) 
The UK will host the COP26 in Glasgow in November 2021.  The summit will bring 
parties together to accelerate action towards the goals of the Paris Agreement and 
the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change.  The aims of the negotiations 
are to accelerate action to  reduce emissions , strengthen adaptation  and resilience 
to climate impacts  and s cale up finance and support .  
 
Oversight and Scrutiny  
 
Task & Finish Group for Climate Emergency  
In order to scrutinise the Action Plan, the Overview and Scrutiny Management 
Committee established the Task and Finish Group at its meeting in February 2020. 
The Task and Finish Group focused on scrutinising the e merging targets and key 
performance indicators underpinning the Action Plan. The Group has made 14 
recommendations to the Council on ways to help to strengthen the Action Plan, 
making it more robust, transparent and evidence based . 
  
The Council used this extensive input as the basis for further work focused in 
particular on our approach to enable the engagement of residents and key 
stakeholders across the Boroug h, as well as to clarify the impact of specific schemes 
and ensure that they were supported by S MART targets.  
  
The Council published response to the Scrutiny Review to set out our underlying 
thinking about our current vision and strategy, outline what we intend to do and 
explain how the group’s recommendations further our vision.  
  
The Overview and Scrutiny Management Committee: Climate Emergency Task and 
Finish Group Report and Recommendations paper (September 2020) can be found 
here. The Council Commentary and Response to Recommendations (October 2020)  
can be found here . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[1] https://www.gov.uk/government/news/pm -commits -350-million -to-fuel-green -recovery  Auditing and Reporting  
 
The council is constantly seeking to ensure the accuracy and quality of the 
information in the action plan, and that our response to climate change is as 
robust as it can be. To this end, we are exploring internal audit as well as different 
assessment and reporting frameworks to allow us to benchmark  with other 
organisations.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 8    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 9    
  
 
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 10   Current Emissions Profile
 
 
 
 
Wokingham Borough`s carbon footprint is 573 ktCO 2 as seen in Figure 1. T his is 
based on government data and reported two years in arrears ( BEIS  2019)1. This is 
comprised of transport emissions (31. 8%), emissions from the industrial and 
commercial sector (2 5.9%), and domestic sector emissions (4 5%).  
 
Residential Buildings  emissions are the greatest single contributor to 
Wokingham’s carbon footprint accounting for 258. 2 ktCO 2. Of these, 71.47  ktCO 2 
 
1   UK local authority and regional carbon dioxide emissions national statistics: 2005 -2017 account for domestic electricity, 177.23 ktCO 2 for domestic gas usage and 10.17 
ktCO 2 for usage of other fuels.   
 
Transport  emissions contribute to 182 ktCO 2. A roads account 84.6 ktCO 2, minor 
roads 88.7 ktCO 2, other transport modes 8. 7 ktCO 2.  
This figure excludes sectors that are completely beyond the council’s scope of 
influence . For example , the emissions from major transport links (M4)  (172.8 
ktCO 2) as well as diesel rail transport  (12.8 ktCO 2), which are  managed by 
Highways England and national rail companies, respectively.  
 
Industrial and commercial Buildings and Operations  - Emissions from energy and 
fuel use in industrial and commercial buildings contributes to 1 48.6  ktCO 2 per 
year as follows: electric ity 86.8  ktCO 2, gas 40.7  ktCO 2, large industrial installations 
0.01 ktCO 2, agriculture 4.1 ktCO 2, and other fuels 17. 1 ktCO 2. 
 
Carbon sequestration  in the B orough accounts for 15.9 ktCO 2 a year through 
forestry and natural land use (LULUCF) , which is around 2.8% of the  Borough’s 
carbon footprint.  
 
How we measure carbon emissions : 
 
The Greenhouse Gas Protocol provides a global standardised framework to 
measure and manage emissions. To distinguish between emissions occurring inside 
and outside the borough ’s boundary resulting from activities within Wokingham , 
emissions are divided int o three categories: scope 1, 2 and 3.   
 
Scope 1:  Emissions associated with combustion of fuels directly by a consumer. 
Within Wokingham this mainly refers to gas use for heating , cooking  and hot water, 
and petrol/diesel used by vehicles whilst they are on  the Borough’s roads.  
 
Scope 2:  Energy which is purchased from elsewhere but used by a consumer. 
Within Wokingham this means the electricity used in the borough. The emissions 
are created at power stations located outside of Wokingham , but the electricity is 
used within the borough supplied via the electricity grid.  148.6 kt CO2
24%
258.2 kt CO2
43%182 kt CO2
30%15.9 kt CO2
-2.8%
Industry and Commercial Total Domestic Total
Transport N. LULUCF Net Emissions
Figure 1.  Wokingham Borough Carbon Footprint 2018 (ktCO 2) 
  
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 11  
  
Scope 3:  Emissions resulting from the behaviour and activity of a consumer but 
occurring from sources outside of their control. Within Wokingham these are the 
emissions from the food we eat, products we buy, our travel outside the borough, 
etc. Measuring these emi ssions is particularly complex as they are often a 
combination of scope 1 and 2 emissions in other locations.  These emissions are out  
of the scope of the Borough’s carbon footprint. However, the council will support 
behavioural change through the actions i n this plan.  
 
Carbon Trajectory  for Wokingham  
 
 
Figure 2 . Projection of current rate reduction of carbon dioxide emissions to 2030 in 
Wokingham Borough  
 
The trajectory of carbon emissions for Wokingham Borough have been steadily 
decreasing since 2012. This is partly due to Central Government targets to increase 
the renewable energy infrastructure nationally resulting in a higher proportion of 
 
2 Local Authorities and the sixth carbon budget. Climate Change Committee. December 2020  renewable ene rgy feeding into the electricity supply , and technological advances 
leading to greater energy efficiency.  
 
Assuming that there is minimal action beyond current, national policy and 
nationally led decarbonisation of the electricity grid and transport through electric 
vehicles, the estimated carbon emissions by 2030 will be approximately 
291.16ktCO 2. This figure excludes the carbon sequestration levels for the Borough 
that could potentially increase by -16.71ktCO 2, providing a predicted carbon 
footprint of 274.45 ktCO 2.  
 
The projected carbon emissions by 2030 have been calculated following an 
extrapolation of the data provided by BEIS. The method used was an extension of 
the behaviour of the carbon dioxide emissions recorded from 2007 up to 2017 for 
Wokingham Borough (data  is published two years on arrears).   
 
The overall picture is needed to help us understand the extent of the response 
required, however, this is classified as experimental statistics because of inherent 
uncertainties in the estimation of CO 2 emissions. We  used available tools to local 
authorities such as the Tyndall report and the Scatter Tool to build scenarios that 
help to understand the uncertainties and key elements that will affect emissions in 
the future. The methodology is subject to ongoing review and refinement.  
 
The CCC report does not recommend that local authorities are set binding carbon 
budgets due to the range of factors affecting local emissions that are beyond their 
direct control. However, it does recommend that local authorities consider Net 
Zero action plans for their own emissions and that they work in partnership to 
reduce area wide emissions2.  
 
The latest government policies introduce new commitments which may influence 
the BAU scenario should they be successfully implemented, for example, the 
increase of renewable energy generation from offshore windfarms. The trajector y 
of carbon emissions will be reviewed  once full details over expected savings are 
made available . 
 
 0.0100.0200.0300.0400.0500.0600.0700.0800.0900.01,000.0
2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020 2022 2024 2026 2028 2030 2032KtCO2e
YearWokingham Carbon Emissions 2030 Scenario 
(557 ktCO2e 2019)
WBC Carbon footprint 2018 BAU Emissions Target Emissions 
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 12  
 Targets and Estimated Carbon Savings  
 
This action plan establishes targets to achieve carbon dioxide reductions in the 
identified priority areas. These focus on tackling emissions from transport, energy 
and gas us age in domestic properti es, generating renewable energy, planting more 
trees and other green foliage, encourage more recycling and encouraging 
behavioural change.  
 
The carbon savings outline d by each target are the cumulative savings for all the 
action in that target for  the next ten years. Some of these targets will not directly 
represent carbon savings but are essential to the delivery of the other targets; 
these are identified as ‘Neutral’ in the carbon saving column.  
 
TR Transport  tCO 2e 
1 Deliver a greenway network of over 37 Km across the 
Borough by 2030 with the ambition to deliver 60 Km by 
2036  4.34  
2 Double public transport use by 2030 from 2019 baseline  3879.86   
3 20% reduction in total distance travelled in private vehicles 
per individual per year by 2030.  29302.50  
4 The use of all cars, vans and motorbikes as a mode of 
transport decreases from 74% (current national/borough 
average) total miles to 56 % in 2030  26372.56  
5 Leading by example - Reduce by 70% CO 2 emissions 
produced by council related travel by 2030  680.18   
6 Continue research and innovation programmes for the 
reduction of CO 2 2898.77   
EV Electric Vehicles  tCO 2e 
7  50% Electric Vehicles ( EVs) registered in the Borough by 
2030 . 45,000   
8 Council's car fleet becomes entirely ultra -low emission by 
2028 . 45.2  
9 100% new buildings are EV ready from 2022  Neutral  
AQ Air Quality  tCO 2 10 Reduce NO 2 concentration by 50% against 2019 baseline in 
the three AQ management areas by 2025  Neutral  
11 Educate  the public on how they can actively improve air 
quality whilst reducing carbon emissions  Neutral   
 Estimated Total Carbon Savings  103,623.37  
 
The above figures are best estimates . 
 
RE Renewable Energy Generation in Council's owned assets  tCO 2 
12 Increase the generation of renewable energy through 
investment in solar farms to power the equivalent of 
25,000 homes within the B orough by 2030 . 25,560  
13 Increased renewable energy generation t o generate 
equivalent to 155 0 kWh per household in 2030  27,333.46  
 Estimated Total Carbon Savings  -52,893.46  
 
The -52,893.46 tCO 2e carbon savings from renewable energy generation are 
expressed as negative emissions .  
 
RT Retrofitting existing and council development  tCO 2 
14 By 2028 All council buildings to be retrofitted to carbon 
neutral standards   6,612.30  
15 By 2029 all local schools to be retrofitted  5,034.08  
RH Retrofitting Households  tCO 2 
16  By 2030, 2 0% of all hous es in the borough to be retrofitted  35,446.0  
 Estimated Total Carbon Savings  47,092.38  
 
CS Carbon Sequestration  tCO 2 
17 Plant 250,000 trees throughout the Borough by 2025 saving 
3.5 ktCO 2 per annum  3,500  
18 Carbon sequestration by design - improving carbon 
sequestration rates in fut ure land management decisions, 
approximately 0.5  ktCO 2e savings  620  
19 Transition to low intensity (high carbon sequestration) land 
management a pproximately 0.05 kt CO 2e savings per annum  224   
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 13  
 20 Implement a programme of carbon sequestration 
opportunities  Neutral  
 Estimated Total Carbon Savings  -4,344  
 
The -4,344 tCO 2e carbon savings from carbon sequestration targets are expressed 
as negative emissions because they generate carbon dioxide removal . 
 
 
SY Schools  and Young People  tCO 2e 
21 Encourage and support school children in the Borough to take 
an active role in reducing carbon emissions  153.06  
22 Celebrate schools’  achievements in climate emergency 
initiatives and inspire the future generations  0.34  
 Estimated Total Carbon Savings  153.4  
 
Estimated CO 2 savings from engagement targets with schools have been reduced 
on last year’s estimates by 79%. Th is is to be  in line with the consumption -based 
UK carbon footprint which states  that only 21% of all greenhouse gas emissions 
are from direct sources and therefore within our scope of influence. Only direct 
emissions can be categorised as savings against Wokingham Borough’s carbon 
footprint, as defined above.  This also ensures less r isk of double counting of 
carbon savings from other sections of the action plane whilst recognising  that 
behaviour change encouraged through  engagement may result in an  accelerated 
shift reach other targets within this plan.  
 
WR Waste & Recycling  tCO 2e 
23 Recover 80% recycling in the form of wet paper by October 
2021 5,188.67  
24 Achieve 70% recycling target by 2030  9,618.23  
25 Zero waste going to landfill by 20 50 8,944.74  
 Estimated Total Carbon Savings  23,751.64  
 
Waste generation & recycling related carbon emissions are not included in the 
BEIS datasets  and are out of scope s 1 and 2 . Hence , the savings are not included 
in the overall totals, but demonstrate the potential savings  from such measures 
and their continued importance overall.   
ND New Development  tCO 2 
26 Towards the end of 2023 , major residential development to 
be designed and built to achieve carbon neutrality  Neutral  
27 From 202 3, major non -residential development to be 
designed and built to achieve the BREEAM excellent standard  Neutral  
28 Establish a spatial strategy and design framework which 
promotes active and sustainable travel, sustainable design 
and construction and enables biodiversity gain  Neutral  
29 Support low carbon and renewable energy generation  Neutral  
30 From 202 3, all new residential and non -residential buildings 
to be designed and built to be EV ready  Neutral  
31 From 2021 100% council new development is built to carbon 
neutral standards  Neutral   
 Estimated Total Carbon Savings  Neutral  
 
It is imperative that new homes in the council must be built to be low -carbon, 
energy and water efficient and climate resilient. Building new homes to net -zero 
carbon standards will not generate carbon savings : however, it will stop new 
carbon dioxide emissions being  generate d. New d evelopment targets are therefore 
preventative targets .   
 
 Procurement  tCO 2 
32 By 2022, achieve sustainable procurement practice 
throughout the Council as part of Corporate Procurement 
Strategy  Neutral  
33 By 2023, the Council will consider social value in all its 
procurement cycles  Neutral  
 Estimated Total Carbon Savings  Neutral  
 
It is essential  that the council procurement and decision -making  policies and 
procedures establ ish requirements for a low-carbon  economy. Addressing the 
carbon emissions from our decision -making  process and the supplier chain would 
contribute to the reduction of carbon emissions embedded in the council  
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 14  
 operations, as t his will stop new carbon dioxide from being generate d. 
Procurement targets are therefore preventative targets.   
 
C&E  Engagement and Behavioural Change  tCO 2 
34 Raise awareness in the community about the climate 
emergency agenda  Neutral  
 Estimated Total Carbon Savings  Neutral  
 
Engagement and behavioural change targets support the delivery of the climate 
emergency action plan. There is great need for significant changes to our 
consumption and behaviour patterns. Through active engagement program mes we 
plan to encourage our residents to be part of this change; their buy -in to this plan 
is crucial in achieving a net -zero Borough by 2030.   
 
Balancing the carbon savings   
 
It is predicted that when  all the actions in the plan have been implemented , the 
Borough will still fall short of its carbon zero target by 2030 by 67.18 ktCO 2 This 
figure has been balanced by accounting for renewable energy generation estimate 
of -52.8 ktCO 2 and the increase of carbon sequestrati on estimated to be -4.5 ktCO 2.  
 
We anticipate that new actions and initiatives will be introduced over the coming 
years, which will enable us to close the shortfall identified.  
 
Because we are working ten years in advance, these targets are best estimates with 
the information we currently have. There is also an assumption that national policy 
will reduce carbon emissions to 274.45 ktCO 2. There is always a risk that these 
policies do not take place as anticipated.  
 
Considerations for the Delivery of the Action Plan  
 
As more information becomes available, we will continually update the targets and 
actions  within this action plan. The council is committed to play as full a role as 
possible, leading by example as well as by exhortation, in achieving a carbon 
neutral Wokingham Borough by 2030.  
 Not all carbon savings for all the projects  listed in this plan have been calculated , 
as some of the information is not available yet. As project s develop,  we will be able 
to give more information on carbon savings per individual action s. 
 
This action plan is a predictive tool that allows us to und erstand  generally, where 
we are heading  and to implement new actions accordingly . Without this tool, we 
would not have a clear path  on what the scale of the approach should be . 
 
In an uncertain world, this plan has the potential to be affected by major global, 
national and local events. The re is an appreciation that the c ouncil must be agile in 
how it responds to the climate emergency in order to fulf il its ambition of zero 
carbon  Borough by 2030.  
 
Wokingham Borough Council Control  and Influence  
 
While Wokingham Borough Council has already established a strong track record 
for delivery on actions to address climate change, the Council’s influence is varied 
and complex across the different activities that occur within their own operations 
and also within the Borough.  
 
Wokingham Borough Council itself is only a small emitter in terms of the 
borough’s emissions as a whole. In 2019/20 the Council emit ted an estimated 
11,156 tonnes of CO 2. That represents around 1.45 % of the approximately tonnes 
of CO 2e from the Borough as a whole.  
 
The Council’s statutory powers and responsibilities are important levers to reduce 
emissions in the Borough . But these po wers are limited when considering how to 
reach net zero across buildings , transport , and industry , meaning that partnership 
and collaboration – and the Council’s role as an influencer and convenor – will be 
vital for the successful delivery of this plan .  
 
More than half of the emissions cuts needed rely on people and businesses taking 
up low -carbon solutions - decisions that are made at a local and individual level. 
Many of these decisions depend on having supporting infrastructure and systems 
in place. Lo cal authorities have powers or influence over roughly a third of 
emissions in their local areas.   
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 15  
  
Consumption Based Emissions  
 
These are emissions that extend beyond the Borough’s boundary, whereby 
demand (and supply) of goods and services will be driving emissions in supply 
chains around the world. Research suggests that imports from abroad could 
represent a further 45% of GHG emissions (relative to the UK produced emissions 
totals . 
 
We - the community - need to recognis e the damage we cause through the goods 
we consume . Between 2017 and 2018, the UK’s carbon footprint is estimated to 
have risen by 1 per cent. This slight increase reflects some increase in household 
heating and an increase in goods imported.  However, not everything  is bad news. 
In 2018, emissions relating to the consumption of goods and services produced in 
the UK were 37 per cent lower than in 1997.3 
 
The Committee on Climate Change (CCC) is set to broaden its reporting to include 
all of the UK's emission s from 2033, incorporating those caused internationally by 
the country in the production and transportation of goods and services.  
 
Challenges & Opportunities  
 
Availability of resources, financial and otherwise, to meet the climate crisis . 
Local government has seen a very significant impact on its finances as a result of 
additional costs and lost income throughout the COVID -19 pandemic.  
 
There is a risk that, despite our commitment to climate goals, projects may be 
delayed in favour of deli vering core statutory duties. Local authorities require 
sufficient funding to increase their skills and capacity to deliver the project 
pipeline for Net Zero.  
 
Nevertheless, there is an opportunity to ensure that all of our investments – to 
enable an incl usive economy, support thriving communities and deliver more, 
affordable housing – will deliver environmental co -benefits  and support the 
transition to a net-zero carbon  Borough .  
 
3 UK's Carbon Footprint 1997 – 2018, DEFRA   
The Council itself seeks to benefit from sustainable and low carbon revenue  
streams and there will be new opportunities to work with the Government and 
private sector on pilot projects, crowdfunding, grants and loans or joint projects.  
 
 
Wokingham Borough Council’s Carbon Footprint as an 
Organisation  
 
Wokingham Borough Council is working to meet  our priority  to provide a clean 
and green borough for our residents . This includes making  improvements and  
changes to the way we work  on a journey to becoming a net zero carbon 
organisation.  
 
Since 2019, officer s from across Wokingham Borough Council who are interested 
in driving sustainable shifts in the council  as a workplace, have created the Green 
Team. In March 2021,  the Green Team completed a report which estimate d the 
council’s carbon footprint as an organisation, from  energy used and waste 
 
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 16  
 produced at office buildings  as well as from staff commuting and how this has 
changed since the shift to majority home working since March 2020.  
 
It was estimated that the 2019/ 20 carbon footprint was 1,700,000  KgCO 2 (1.7 
ktCO 2). The main contributor was CO 2 emission from commuting to and from 
work (61%)  followed by gas consumption  (22%) , electricity consumption (17%) 
and finally emission from waste produced  (0.1%) . 
 
Data was also gathered from the 2020/21 year,  and this showed that changes to 
our way of working has reduced the Wokingham Borough Council carbon 
footprint by  an estimated  56% . This was mostly due to a huge decrease in 
emissions from commuting  which  decrea sed by 87% , making gas emissions the 
largest emitting sector  of our new and current  carbon footprint.  
 
The above is an estimation and is subject to change with improved data collection 
in years to come.  Going forward, this annual report will help to set the tone for 
any discussion of the WBC estate and facilities , especially as colleagues return to 
work and adapt to a new way of working once again.  
 
For this comparison report, information for energy consumption and waste 
tonnage was based on the most up t o date information from the council’s two 
biggest office sites which house the majority of staff. Please note that total 
energy consumption from all corporate sites produces 7,098 tCO 2 per annum 
from electricity and a further 4,058 tCO 2 per annum from Gas.  This total carbon 
footprint (11,156 tCO 2) accounts for 1.45% of the total Borough’s footprint. The 
council aims to continue to reduce these emissions by improving energy 
efficiency and increasing renewable energy generation to become a net zero 
carbon org anisation by 2030.  
 
The t argets specifically aimed at reducing council owned CO 2 emissions from 
operating as a workplace  are: 
 
 
Transport   
 
The council wants to lead by example when  reducing carbon emissions from 
transport, target 5 aims at reducing 70% of CO 2 emissions produced by council related travel by 2030  by promoting home working, remote working and reducing 
miles produced by council staff. Target 8 aims to transition the c ouncil's vehicle  
fleet to ultra -low emission by 2028 . 
 
 
Buildings & Energy  
 
The council is delivering a retrofitting program me and aims to retrofit  all council 
buildings to improve their energy performance and achieve carbon neutral 
standards, whe re possible, by 2028  (target 14) . Additionally, the council aims at 
installing renewable energy installations in its buildings when feasible.  
 
Procurement  
 
The council is committed to achieve sustainable procurement practice throughout 
our operations and, as part of Corporate Procurement Strategy , to consider social 
value in all its procurement cycles . This is reflected in t argets 32 and 33 and 
related actions . 
 
Engagement and Behavioural Change  
 
Target 34.6 establishes the council’s commitment to s upport changes in work 
practices and behavioural change amongst council staff . 
   
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 17  
  
 
DT: Include a risk register, setting out the major risks (including the impact of 
third party action and non -action); - provide context to risk registers   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Climate Emergency 
Action Plan   
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 18  
 Transport  
Carbon savings :  
Being one of the key sectors  which contributes towards emissions in the 
borough, transport targets remain a priority for the council, with 
significant progress being made in a number of areas. However, the 
delivery of many projects has been massively affected and temporarily 
delayed in many cases, due to the impact of the Covid -19 pandemic.  
 
Indeed, planned infrastructure work, changes and delivering training has 
been difficult during the past year, while policy changes to discourage 
public transport use and limit users in this period has led to sharp decline 
in numbers using these services. W hile these have begun to recover as 
restrictions are eased, they remain very uncertain along many other 
projects . Overall, this means much of the progress is temporarily halted 
(unless otherwise stated) while the potential implications of Covid -19 are 
asse ssed, to ensure the correct direction is taken following the scale of 
changes to working and transport patterns on the whole. Fortunately, 
despite these difficulties many programs were still able to be run 
successfully , and as a result  of the government ba n on non -essential travel 
and resulting rise in home working , there was a 31% decrease in car-use, 
leading  savings of 44,930.85 tCO 2e being  achieved this year.  
 
Key achievements  
• The two Park and Ride projects for Winnersh Triangle and Coppid 
Beach have planning permission and work started in March 2021 . 
• Great progress made in the delivery of our green ways and PRoW 
schemes, 75% of Route B  has been agreed. Route C  started its first  
trench of construction and Route D  of The Loddon Distance is moving 
forward following very positive response from landowners.  
• 320 children received cycling training sessions, Five adult cycle training 
sessions  were delivered , and 74 bikes received support from Dr Bike .  
• The adult bike loan scheme continues to facilitate bikes to residents 
that do not own a bike. The scheme was extended to keyworkers.  
• Cycle September saw 238 residents taking part, 63% up on last year. A 
combined 41 ,261 miles were cycled and in total, 1,305lbs of CO2 was 
saved if those miles have been driven.   • Online activities and resources for Bikeability and road safety available  
• Walking and cycling trails were introduced throughout the Borough 
using posters and Q R trails at Hunt for Hound activities at California 
Country Park, Buckhurst Meadows, Wokingham Without and 
Arborfield, Croft Gardens at Shinfield.   
 
Our Partners  
For each target , the council has engaged with partners to ensure these are 
incorporated into existing plans and maximising their potential for success. 
Town s & parish council s, local bus companies, residents, schools, local 
businesses and consultants/subcontractors are ke y for the delivery  of this 
plan.   
 
Behaviour al change is vital to producing the carbon savings associated 
with the actions listed below. Engagement with the stakeholders listed 
above will be key to the uptake in use of new and improved infrastructure 
such as greenways and bus services to reduce reliance on private vehicles 
and encourage a modal shift in the way we travel around the borough.  
 
Consumption Emissions  
The only element of consumption within this sector would come from the 
initial purchase of a vehicle, which does not fall within our scope. Fuel is 
accounted for directly within scope 1 emissions.  
 
Future Opportunities  
A variety of new government led policies have  recently been announced  
which may improve  the future effectiveness and likelihoods of these 
actions , including the  ban on petrol/diesel vehicles being brought forward, 
the environment bill and the bus back better scheme . Therefore, as each 
of these develops , they will i nfluence the below actions and scope of such . 
This is a live document , meaning as these developments are introduced  
they  will be incorporate d and actions adapt ed, assessing throughout what 
opportunities are available to maximise the potential benefits , such as  
optimising traffic management through advanced software  and greater 
embracing of home -working still post covid.  
  SDG S 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 19  
 TR Action  Description / Outcome  Co Benefits / Unintended 
consequences  Milestone  Carbon 
Savings 
tCO2e  Timescale  Project 
Cost  (£) RAG 
T1 Target 1.  Deliver a greenway network of over 37 Km across the Borough by 2030 with the ambition to deliver 60 Km by 2036   4.34   7.5 M   
1.1 Deliver a 
comprehensive 
and connected 
network of 
greenway routes 
to encourage 
active and 
sustainable 
transport modes   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Greenways are a strategic network of 
traffic free, multi -user routes that will 
connect the Strategic Development 
Locations to the existing heritage green 
and blue infrastructure, communities 
and places of interest, employment or 
recreational value.  
 
Creat e a coherent network system of 
well signposted greenways that enable 
an increased take up of sustainable 
transport modes and becoming more 
active, towards a reduction of car usage.  
Overall, the network (SDLs) will provide 
33.5 km of new and enhanced route s by 
2030 and a total of 60 km by 2036.  
 
This will achieve carbon savings of 4.34 
tco2e  
  
 
 
 
 
 
This network supports many of 
the later actions in enabling 
more people to switch away 
from cars,  so the majority of 
savings are directly counted 
there, while al so improving air 
quality and access to key areas.  Review and approve rights of way 
improvement plan  
Progress: Published in April 2020. 83 
separate actions included in the plan 
which will be delivered in phases.  
  
4.34    
Short term  TBC  
Route A - South of M4 SDL - Arborfield - 
Barkham - 5.5. Km  Medium  
term   
Route B -  Arborfield SDL - Barkham - 
Wokingham - 7.6 km  Short term  570,000   
Route D - Arborfield SDL – Barkham – 
South Wokingham SDL - Wokingham - 7 
Km Medium 
term  TBC  
Route E - River Loddon – Arborfield - 2.1 
Km Long term  TBC  
Route F - Arborfield – Arborfield SDL -   
4.0 Km  Long term  TBC  
Route I - Arborfield SDL - Finchampstead 
- California Country Park - 1.9km  Short term  40,000   
Route J - Arborfield SDL - Blackwater 
Valley - 2.9 Km  Long term  TBC  
Route K - Arborfield Cross - 2.5 Km  Long term  TBC  
Progress: On the Green Ways Projects a 
contractor for Cantley Park has been 
selected, while work continues on  the 
Jubilee Avenue section. The council is 
working with SERT to align works and 
design at Woosehill Meadows and we 
expect to be starting a public 
consultation soon for that part. Design 
works continuing for Coombes Lane / 
Coles Lane. Greenway website crea ted 
with all relevant information.   Nil   
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 20  
 TR Action  Description / Outcome  Co Benefits / Unintended 
consequences  Milestone  Carbon 
Savings 
tCO2e  Timescale  Project 
Cost  (£) RAG 
The River Loddon Long Distance Path 
(LLDP) will link between many of the 
Greenway Routes, particularly the 
greenways connecting to the Arborfield 
and the South of the M4 SDL. It aims to 
link the Thames Valley Path in the north 
of the Borough in Wargrave to the 
Blackwater Valley Path in the South of 
the Borough in Swallowfield.  
Overall, the LLDP network will provide 
30.6km of new traffic free paths to 
encourage residents to become more 
active and utilise sustainable travel 
solutions, that ultimately will reduce the 
amount of private vehicles on the roads.  LLDP Section A - Blackwater Valley Path, 
Swallowfield to A327 Reading Road - 6.8 
Km Medium 
term  TBC  
LLDP Section B - A327 Reading Road to 
Showcase Cinema, Winnersh - 8.42 Km  Short term  TBC   
LLDP Section C - Showcase Cinema, 
Winnersh to Waggon & Horses Pub, 
Twyford - 6.55 Km  Short term  612,000   
LLDP Section D - Waggon & Horses Pub, 
Twyford to River Thames - 8.84 Km  Short term  TBC   
T2 Target 2. Double public transport use by 2030 from 2019 baseline  3879.86    TBC   
2.1 Produce bus 
service 
improvement 
plan - October 
2021  Gap analysis SWOT analysis, produce  
policies of what will need to be improved  
Enhance partnership - vision, plan,  
setting the policy framework and 
establishing targets for bus passenger 
growth within the borough.  
 
The carbon savings are yet to be 
calculated but incorporated in the overall  
figure.  Setting the policy framework 
for bus services to recover from 
Covid and for establishing 
longer -term growth.  
 
Allow access to funding - 
COVID -19 Bus Services Support 
Grant  (CBSSG) or any new 
sources . Publishing the bus service improvement 
plan 
Engagement and consultation local bus 
operators, internal stakeholders  Included 
in total  Short term  TBC  
2.2 Establish an 
enhanced 
partnership with 
contractors  Making legally bidding document with 
bus operators - define levels of service 
and provision of infrastructure in relation 
to the schemes  
Identifying key corridors and setting 
frequency of bus service - set up bus 
priority and how to improve journey 
times  
 Allow access to 
transformational funding  Have an Enhanced Partnership in Place 
by 1st April 2022  Included 
in total  Short term  TBC 
   
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 21  
 TR Action  Description / Outcome  Co Benefits / Unintended 
consequences  Milestone  Carbon 
Savings 
tCO2e  Timescale  Project 
Cost  (£) RAG 
The carbon savings are yet to be 
calculated but incorporated in the overall 
figure.  
2.3 Support 
electrification of 
local buses  Zero emission bus regional areas (ZEBRA)  
Route 21 - Lower Early - Reading 
University - Reading Town Centre  
 
Depending on Reading buses having the 
required funding for fleet renewal   
Gov will fund 75% and LA need to fund 
the rest  
No. buses / - Reding buses website - 
route 21  
 
The carbon savings are yet to be 
calculated but incorporated in the overall 
figure.   Identification of the route/buses/ 
specifications  
 
Applying and achieve funding for Zero 
emission bus regional areas (ZEBRA)  
Trunch 1. 2021 May 2021  
Trunch 2. September 2021  
 
2 years after award funding  Included 
in total  Medium 
term  TBC 
  
2.4 Improve the bus 
public transport 
network for 
Wokingham 
Town.  Identifying the key transport needs for 
the public travelling between 
Wokingham and surrounding areas: 
Wokingham Town, Finchampstead, 
Winnersh, Twyford, and Woodley to 
decrease the number of people arriving 
in personal vehicles at public tr ansport 
interchanges (rail stations & P&R sites) 
by 5% by March 2022.  
 
The carbon savings are yet to be 
calculated but incorporated in the overall 
figure.  This presents the opportunity 
to synchronise timetables.  Launch public consultation.  
Included 
in total  Short term  
TBC  
LCTS consultation  
Progress: Completed  Short term  
Re-tender the public transport contract 
with reading buses to procure an 
improved contract  
Progress: The town centre  strategy is 
complete   
2.5 Bus Stop 
Infrastructure 
Works to Support 
North Arborfield 
SDL Bus Strategy  Public Transport infrastructure 
enhancement includes more shelter from 
poor weather, more seating capacity and 
real time information displays to Connect people to jobs, study 
and local  services  
Allow people who are old,  
young, disabled and isolated  to 
commute   Create a bus strategy for North 
Arborfield  
Progress: The strategy has been 
published and an implementation plan 
agreed   Included 
in total   
Medium 
Term  54,000  
  
    
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 22  
 TR Action  Description / Outcome  Co Benefits / Unintended 
consequences  Milestone  Carbon 
Savings 
tCO2e  Timescale  Project 
Cost  (£) RAG 
encourage more residents to use the bus 
network.  
 
The carbon savings are yet to be 
calculated but incorporated in the overall 
figure.  Help reduce traffic jams.  
Start works on site.  
2.6 Increase peak -
hour bus 
transport for 
Lower Early  Increase the capacity of bus transport 
between Lower Earley and Reading as 
surveys suggest morning services are at 
capacity and leaving passengers at stops.  
5% decrease in the number of people 
arriving in single occupancy vehicles at 
public transport interchanges (rail 
stations & P&R sites) by March 2022.  
 
The carbon savings are yet to be 
calculated but incorporated in the overall 
figure.  Connect people to jobs, study 
and local  services  
Allow people who are old,  
young, disabled and isolated  to 
commute   
Help reduce traffic jams  Review contract with Reading buses  
Progres s: Additional capacity has been 
delivered on a short term basis   Included 
in total   
 
Short term  £0-250,000   
2.7 Implement the 
South of M4 bus 
strategy  Increasing the frequency of the Leopard 
Bus services, serving the South of M4 SDL 
to increase the number of residents 
using this by 5%.  
 
The carbon savings are yet to be 
calculated but incorporated in the overall 
figure.  
 Connect people to jobs, study 
and local  services  
Allow people who are old,  
young, disabled and isolated  to 
commute   
Help reduce traffic jams  Launch public consultation to understand 
demand for travel  
Included 
in total   
Short term  £480,000   
Progress: Achieved in Feb 2020  
2.8 Investigate 
demand services 
opportunities and 
on-demand flexi -
routes  Improve access to rural areas by 
implementing an uber style public 
transport service for people living in 
remote locations where a full service 
would be unviable but still help reduce 
car usage. Leading to a 5% increase in 
the number of trips from our public 
transport interchanges by bus and rail by 
March 2022.  Covid will limit the number of 
users of such services down to 
1 or 2 passengers, making it 
less viable.  Twyford is being considered under the 
rural mobility fund bid as a pilot area.  
 
Progress: A bid has been submitted but 
has been unsuccessful    Included 
in total   
 
Short term   TBC  
Investigate ARRIVA Click success  
 
Progress: Under consultation to explore 
DRT further   
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 23  
 TR Action  Description / Outcome  Co Benefits / Unintended 
consequences  Milestone  Carbon 
Savings 
tCO2e  Timescale  Project 
Cost  (£) RAG 
 
The carbon savings are yet to be 
calculated but incorporated in the overall 
figure.  Progress: Bid has been submitted   
2.9 Retender bus 
network 
operating in 
Wokingham Town 
Centre with low 
carbon engines  Reduce emissions from the operation of 
public buses by specifying a low carbon 
engine classification for buses for 
Wokingham Town to be a minimum of 
Euro 6 standard by the end of 2020 and 
ultra -low emission by 2028.  
 
The carbon savings are yet to be 
calculated but incorporated in t he overall 
figure.  Research on these engines 
could be applied to other 
sectors.  Change specification in the tender 
documentation.  
 
Purchase new buses . 
 
Communications campaign to promote 
new low carbon service.   Included 
in total   
Long term  TBC  
2.10 Deliver the 
Winnersh Triangle 
Parkway parking 
project and 
infrastructure 
enhancement at 
Coppid Beech  Creation of more parking spaces at 
Winnersh parkway station and Coppid 
beech to encourage uptake of public 
transport for part of the journey, leading 
to a 10% increase in the number of 
residents using a train or park & ride at 
least once a week by March 2026.  
 
This will achieve carbon savings of 
153.34 tco2e  
 Improvement costs offset 
somewhat by revenue.  Design schemes  
Planning permission  
Choose contractor  
Start on site work  
Progress: Planning permission has been 
obtained and work started March  2021.  153.34    
 
Medium 
Term  £5,800,000   
T3 Target3. (Demand)  20% reduction in total distance travelled in private vehicles per individual per year by 2030.   29,302.5   TBC   
3.1 Engage 
businesses to 
promote 
homeworking and 
remote working 
when possible  Capitalise on the unintended 
consequences of the national lockdown 
by engaging with businesses to 
understand their working practices and 
encourage them to consider the new 
ways of working in their recovery plans 
to overall reduce the CO2 emissions 
caused by travel from workers of local 
businesses by 30% by 2022  
 People are more li kely to stay 
around their home areas in 
general, shopping locally etc, 
rather than driving to out of 
town areas after work. 
Increased time freedom due to 
lack of commute also increases 
adoption of active/sustainable 
transport methods.  Engage business throu gh a survey to 
assess their working practices during the 
national lockdown and encourage new 
ways of working as part of their recovery 
plans.  
Progress: Research underway  4,200  Short term  Nil  
Deliver a communications campaign to 
encourage local business to learn from 
COVID -19 unintended consequences.  
Progress: Most businesses remain 
primarily working from home, with Nil  
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 24  
 TR Action  Description / Outcome  Co Benefits / Unintended 
consequences  Milestone  Carbon 
Savings 
tCO2e  Timescale  Project 
Cost  (£) RAG 
This will achieve carbon savings of 4200 
tco2e  employer packs being prepared to 
support this long term.  
3.2 Promote the 
Liftshare scheme 
through My 
Journey to help 
individuals and 
businesses 
develop bespoke 
travel policies  Reduce transport related CO2e 
emissions, reduce congestion, improved 
road safety and air quality by promoting 
Liftshare, which helps compani es  assess 
staff travel patterns to promote car 
sharing. To achieve a 10% reduction in 
the number of single occupancy car trips 
to and from businesses by March 2022.  
 
This will achieve carbon savings of 
14651.24 tco2e  Due to covid much more 
difficult to ha ve lift sharing for 
health reasons.  Produce and submit proposal 
Procurement process  
14651.24  Short term  TBC  
Launch Lifts hare scheme  
Map commuter trips across the Borough 
and provide access to live data on how 
many miles/CO2 can be saved by people 
lift sharing across the Borough and for 
each individual business.  Short term  
 TBC Set up CO2 emissions targets for local 
businesses  Short term  
Deliver a communications campaign to 
promote active and sustainable travel 
modes through competitions   
T4 Target 4. (Modal shift) The use of all cars, vans  and motorbikes as a mode of transport decreases from 74% (current national/borough 
average) total miles to 56% in 2030   26,372.56   TBC   
4.1 To provide more 
primary school 
children with the 
opportunity to 
develop practical 
skills and an 
understanding of 
how to cycle 
safely.  Offer bikeability training up to level 3 to 
more primary school children in 
Wokingham Borough to improve cycling 
skills amongst children and improve air 
quality by substituting cycling for car 
journeys.  
Achieve a 5% re duction in the number of 
children being driven to Wokingham 
Borough schools by March 2022.  
 
This will achieve carbon savings of 15.4 
tco2e  Will be more likely to choose 
cycling over cars as adults, 
health benefits from exercise.  
Increased time freedom due  to 
lack of commute also increases 
adoption of active transport 
methods. People have 
embraced local green spaces.  Compile and deliver an annual events 
programme for Bikeability courses.  
 
Monitor impact of programme on take 
up of cycling to school  
Progress:  872 children trained on 
bikeability courses in 2020 -21, with level 
3 targets being exceeded.   15.4 Short term  £122,512   
4.2 Encourage and 
support local 
schools to join 
Modeshift Awards 
scheme for active 
and sustainable 
travel  Create a culture of active travel amongst 
school children, having a direct impact 
on air quality, carbon savings and helps 
improve student health and 
concentration levels. Leading to a 10% 
reduction in the number of children 
being driven to school by March  2026.  Will be more likely to choose 
active transport over cars as 
adults, health benefits from 
exercise. People have 
embraced local green spaces.  
Increased time freedom due to 
lack of commute also increases Six schools targeted within the 
Wokingham Town, Finchampstead and 
Twyford areas (AQMA), to achieve 
Modeshift STARs accreditation at bronze, 
silver or gold le vel, as appropriate for the 
school, supported by active travel 
officers.    
  
137.7   Medium 
Term  £89,000    
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 25  
 TR Action  Description / Outcome  Co Benefits / Unintended 
consequences  Milestone  Carbon 
Savings 
tCO2e  Timescale  Project 
Cost  (£) RAG 
 
This will achieve carbon savings of 137.7 
tCO2e adoption of active transport 
methods.  Progress: The six schools have agreed to 
participate once safe to do so  
Promote the following campaigns in 
schools in the AQMA area: a car free day, 
an anti -idling campaign, national clean 
air day campaign, and Beat the Street  
Progress: Campaigns are scheduled to 
run this year  Short term  £101,101  
4.3 Roll out the 
Healthy School 
Streets 
programme  Trial programme at school streets to 
tackle congestion, road safety and air 
quality by restricting motor traffic at the 
school gates for a short period of time, 
generally at drop -off and pick -up times. 
This will make it more difficult to drive to 
the schoo l for the school run, resulting in 
a reduction in students being driven to 
school. Leading to a 10% reduction in the 
number of children being driven to 
school by March 2026.  
 
The carbon savings are yet to be 
calculated but incorporated in the overall 
figure. People have embraced local 
green spaces.  Design how the scheme will work.  
Select a school to pilot scheme.  
Review the results of the pilot.  
Role out scheme more widely.  
 
Progress: Scheme on hold, to be 
reviewed in 2 years.  TBC Long term  £2,000   
4.4 Increase the 
uptake of cycling 
from local 
business by 
promoting the 
Love to Ride 
programme  Encourages people to choose cycling as 
their main mode for essential travel and 
as a fun, enjoyable form of daily exercise. 
Aiming to reduce the CO2 emissions 
from employees of local businesses 
travelling to work by 10% by 2025.  
 
This will achieve carbon savings of 1240 
tco2e  Health benefits from exercise.  
Increased time freedom due to 
lack of commute also increases 
adoption of active transport 
methods. People have 
embraced local green spaces.  Ride anyway week campaign - 23 - 27 
March 2020  
  
1,240   
   
 
Medium 
term  
£50,000   
Run 4 campaigns per year to promote 
cycling to work  
Progress: Multiple campaigns have been 
run with positive responses, such as the 
QR trails, hunt and hound activities and 
climate action related design 
competitions.  
This includes cycle September which 
encouraged 1417 people to switch to 
bikes for over 1.2m million miles.  Short - 
Medium 
term    
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 26  
 TR Action  Description / Outcome  Co Benefits / Unintended 
consequences  Milestone  Carbon 
Savings 
tCO2e  Timescale  Project 
Cost  (£) RAG 
Work in partnership with local businesses 
to promote active travel breakfast  Short term   
4.5 Develop the Local 
Cycling and 
Walking 
Infrastructure 
Plan (LCWIP) to 
be Borough wide 
and implement 
50% LCWIP by 
2030  Create a comprehensive network of 
walking/cycling routes across the 
Borough which are joined up, based on 
evidence and data from the LCWIP 
process.  
 
Aiming to increase cycling modal share 
by 4% and walking modal share by 5%.  
 
This will achieve carbon savings of 
12151.8 tco2e  Health benefits from exercise.  
Increased time freedom due to 
lack of commute also increases 
adoption of active transport 
methods. People have 
embraced local green spaces.  Phase 1. Completion of first LCWIP report 
2020.  
 
Progress: First report c omplete but 
undergoing change in response to new 
government policy.   12,151.80  Long term  5,000,000   
Phase 2. Roll out of further LCWIP studies 
across the borough from 2021 to 2025  
Phase 3. Implementation of measures 
from the reports ongoing to 2030  33,000,000   
4.6 Deliver 
engagement and 
cycle training 
events across the 
Borough  Deliver cycling training events such as 
bike hubs, Dr bike checks, puncture 
repair classes, smoothie bike, cycling 
skills and bike obstacle course, Bike 
bonanza and Bikeability training levels 1 -
3. This increases confidence, road safety 
awareness and skill level on bikes to 
achieve a 2% increase in residents 
regularly cycling for leisure and utility by 
March 2022.  
 
Engage residents with active travel 
schemes by provid ing discounts for bikes 
& accessories.  
 
This will achieve carbon savings of 
213.18 tco2e  Health benefits from exercise.  
Increased time freedom due to 
lack of commute also increases 
adoption of active transport 
methods. People have 
embraced local green sp aces.  Deliver events for Montague Park and a 
new one in Shinfield as planned in the 
Events Programme 2020 - 2021  
Progress: Dr Bike sessions are still being 
run and are full booked up quickly, 74 
bikes checked.    
102.88    
 
 
Short term  £1,500   
Deliver Wokingham Bikeaton as planned 
in the Events Programme 2020 - 2021  
Progress: The was delivered, albeit with 
restrictions due to covid  Short term  £500   
Deliver Cycle hubs for Woodley, FBC, 
Montague Park and Shinfield as planned  
in the Events Programme 2020 - 2021  
Progress: Paused but cycle trails and 
scooter training delivered in replacement  110.3   Short term  £5,000   
4.7 Adult cycle 
training  Shine over 60s cycling program, focus on 
encouraging outdoor cycling for people 
over 60 for travel, leading to a 3% 
reduction in car use by residents over 60.  
 
This will achieve carbon savings of 
1757.8 tco2e  Health benefits from exercise.  
Increased time freedom due to 
lack of commute also increases 
adoption of active transport 
methods. People have 
embraced local green spaces.  Deliver SHINE rides events as planned in 
the Events Programme 2020 - 2021  
Progress:  5 events delivered autumn 
2020 before restrictions  1,757.8   Short term  £1,500    
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 27  
 TR Action  Description / Outcome  Co Benefits / Unintended 
consequences  Milestone  Carbon 
Savings 
tCO2e  Timescale  Project 
Cost  (£) RAG 
4.8 Completion of the 
Cross Berkshire 
Cycle Route – 
NCN 422  Creation of a new national cycle route 
between Newbury and Windsor (approx. 
30 miles), including a section within 
Reading, Wokingham Borough, West 
Berkshire, Bracknell Forest and Windsor 
& Maidenhead, and it is included within 
the Thames Valley Berkshire L ocal 
Growth Deal. This will encourage more 
residents to cycle by connecting people 
with key destinations.  
 
The carbon savings are yet to be 
calculated but incorporated in the overall 
figure.  Health benefits from exercise.  
Increased time freedom due to 
lack of commute also increases 
adoption of active transport 
methods. People have 
embraced local green spaces.  Completion of route across Wokingham 
with a combination of shared use and on -
carriageway cycle lanes on the A329.  
Progress: Completed  and has alread y 
seen an increase in cycling on the route . Included 
in total  Short term  1,000,000   
4.9 South Wokingham 
Railway Crossings 
(Foot and cycle)  Improved walking and cycling 
infrastructure will encourage residents to 
mode shift.  
 
The carbon savings are yet to be 
calculated but incorporated in the overall 
figure.  Health benefits from exercise.  
Increased time freedom due to 
lack of commute also increases 
adoption of active transport 
methods. People have 
embraced local green spaces.   Included 
in total   
Short term  1,500,000   
4.10  Promote active 
and sustainable 
travel modes 
amongst new 
residents in new 
developments.  Inform new residents of the alternatives 
to single occupancy car use, promoting 
the wider benefits of active and 
sustainable travel while providing a local 
context. Welcome packs are provided 
with offers and discounts for sustainable 
travel like bus taster tickets and cycle 
shop discounts as well as localised cycle 
and bus maps and SANG walks.  
Aiming to achieve 25% of new residents 
travelling sustainably on a daily basis 
across the Strategic Development 
Locations each year by 2026.  
 Health benefits from exercise.   
People are more likely to stay 
around their home areas in 
general, shopping locally etc, 
rather than driving to out of 
town areas after work. 
Increased time freedom due to 
lack of commute also increases 
adoption of active/sustainable 
transport methods. P eople 
have embraced local green 
spaces.  Welcome pack for Deer Leap Park and 
Orchard Rise in the Spencerswood area  
 
 
Included 
in total  
  
 
   
Medium 
term  £1,000   
Welcome pack for Deer Leap Park and 
Orchard Rise in the Arborfield area  Medium 
term  £1,000   
Welcome pack for Deer Leap Park and 
Orchard Rise in the Wokingham area   Medium 
term  £1,000    
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 28  
 TR Action  Description / Outcome  Co Benefits / Unintended 
consequences  Milestone  Carbon 
Savings 
tCO2e  Timescale  Project 
Cost  (£) RAG 
The carbon savings are yet to be 
calculated but incorporated in the overall 
figure.  
4.11  Provide 
personalised 
travel planning to 
new residents  All residents in new developments are 
offered transport advice about 
alternative modes of travel, including 
free testing ticket and tailored travel 
packages. Aiming to achieve 25% of new 
residents travelling sustainably on a daily 
basis across the Strategi c Development 
Locations each year by 2026.  
 
The carbon savings are yet to be 
calculated but incorporated in the overall 
figure.  Increased time freedom due to 
lack of commute also increases 
adoption of active/sustainable 
transport methods. People 
have embraced local green 
spaces.  Personalise travel planning to new 
residents in Shinfield development  Included 
in total   
Medium 
term  £25,000   
4.12  Develop a 
domestic and 
industrial freight 
management 
policy alongside 
LTP4  To develop a borough wide traffic 
distribution hierarchy to understand 
traffic capacity, and traffic carrying 
routes. Improving operational logistics 
could reduce the number of 'empty runs' 
and consequently the number of trucks 
on the road, leading to a 22% decrease in 
distance tra velled by road freight.  
 
The framework will support decision 
making on the traffic distribution, based 
on air quality, carbon emissions and 
energy savings.  
Working towards creating a baseline and 
will then collect data accurately to 
streamline this figure.  
 
This will achieve estimated carbon 
savings of 23240.92 tco2e  
 Reduces operational costs for 
firms and storage energy usage 
as more efficient supply chain .  
Covid will have impacted 
demand levels.  Data gathering and assessment – 
development of the hierarchy  
 
Deliver the first draft freight 
management policy  23,240.92  Short term  TBC  
T5 Target 5. Leading by example - Reduce by 70% CO2e emissions produced by council related travel by 2030  680.18   TBC    
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 29  
 TR Action  Description / Outcome  Co Benefits / Unintended 
consequences  Milestone  Carbon 
Savings 
tCO2e  Timescale  Project 
Cost  (£) RAG 
5.1 Deliver a strategy 
to reduce miles 
produced by 
council staff work 
related travel.  To investigate the possibility to introduce 
EV Car clubs for council staff between 
Monday to Friday and with the option to 
open to the public during the weekends. 
Aiming to reduce grey fleet miles by 30% 
from transport related trips.  
 
This will achieve carbon savings of 291.5 
tco2e  
 Sets example so other actions 
more likely to be followed.  Carry out assessment fo r car clubs and 
produce a strategy  291.5   Medium 
term  TBC  
5.2 Promote 
homeworking and 
remote working 
practices amongst 
council staff  In addition to home working, expand 
remote working practices in other 
locations to reduce unnecessary travel 
and the need for central office 
accommodation. Aiming to reduce the 
CO2 emissions travelled from council 
staff to work by 40% by 2022.  
 
This will achieve carbon savings of 
388.672 tco2e  Lockdown has greatly sped up 
this process and meant that 
everyone is doing it so 
integrates more easily with any 
partners. Sets example so other 
actions more likely to be 
followed.  Capitalise on the unintended 
consequences of the national lockdown 
by reviewing working from home 
practices in the council and consider new 
ways  of working in the recovery plan for 
the council.    
388.67   
Short term  Nil  
Deliver a staff survey to assess working 
from home preferences amongst council 
staff.  Short term  Nil 
5.3 Incentivise council 
staff to mode shift 
to active and 
sustainable 
transport or EVs  Investigate incentives that can be given 
to council staff to support their commute 
to work being more sustainable by 
implementing schemes that make such 
methods more accessible. Aiming to 
reduce the CO2 emissions from staff 
travelling to work by 10% by 2025.  
 
This will achieve carbon savings of 97.17 
tco2e  Increased time freedom due to 
lack of commute also increases 
adoption of active/sustainable 
transport methods. Sets 
example so other actions more 
likely to be followe d. Carry out an assessment of viability of 
salary sacrifice schemes that could be 
offered to council employees for 
sustainable transport or EVs.   97.17  Medium 
term  c£10k   
T6 Target 6. Continue  research and innovation programmes for the reduction of CO 2 and NO  2898.77    TBC   
6.1 Continue to 
research and use 
innovative 
techniques to 
manage traffic 
and encourage Research will continue and opportunities 
will be taken where appropriate. An 
arbitrary estimate of a 10% reduction in 
CO2 is assumed.  
 Benefits air quality, safety and 
congestion with reduced costs 
for all.  
 Low Carbon Transport  Strategy 
completed  1449.39   Medium 
term  TBC    
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 30  
 TR Action  Description / Outcome  Co Benefits / Unintended 
consequences  Milestone  Carbon 
Savings 
tCO2e  Timescale  Project 
Cost  (£) RAG 
uptake of 
sustainable 
modes and ultra -
low emission 
options  This will achieve carbon savings of 
1449.39 tco2e, which is in addition to 
below as it is achieved by improvements 
in engine efficiency and traffic solutions 
rather than a switch to 
active/sustainable methods.  Effects of transport shifts from 
covid need to be considered 
within analysis.  
6.2 Mobility as a 
service (MaaS) 
and future 
proofing the 
network.  MaaS is part of ITS strategic objective  
 
Contribute to reduce the need to own a 
car and link up the public transport and 
active mode options to make it easier to 
travel sustainably, resulting in a further 
reduction of private motor vehicle 
ownership by 10%.  
 
This will achieve carbon savings of 
1449.39tco2e  Benefits air quality, safety and 
congestion with reduced costs 
for all.  
 
Effects of transport shifts from 
covid need to be considered 
within analysis.  Data gathering and assessment  
 
To be considered further in 2021/2022  1449.39  Medium 
term  TBC   
6.3 Deliver a variety 
of smart mobility 
projects  Deliver a combination of operational and 
information technologies that assess 
growing traffic peak demand while 
attaining environmental and user -
experience data. This will deliver smarter 
and more sustainable t ransport mobility 
combining different modes and options 
(public transport, car sharing, car rental 
services, taxis and a bicycle system).  
These carbon savings are captured 
above.  Benefits air quality, safety  and 
congestion with reduced costs 
for all.  
 
Effects of transport shifts from 
covid need to be considered 
within analysis.  ITS strategy completed. Investigate key 
locations to be included in the pilot. 
Special focus on Park & Ride sites and 
key gateways to  the Borough.  
Captured 
in above   
  Short term  
TBC   
Gather C2 Cloud traffic data and put it in 
an open form to be utilise internally.  Medium 
term  
 
 
 
 
 
  
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 31  
 Electric Vehicles  
 
Carbon savings :  
In conjunction with the transport goals of reducing car usage and switching 
to more sustainable modes of transport, it is equally important  to 
transition  as many vehicles away from fossil fuel use  as possible  in order 
to cut down this major source of emiss ions on the road to net zero. 
Therefore, to support this process, the council has begun measures 
towards improving accessibility , providing guidance and funding advice , 
assisting businesses and developing the necessary infrastructure to 
provide a reliable network and convenient  in order to encourage the 
uptake of electric vehicles within the borough.  
 
However, this is a considerable undertaking and will require significant 
analysis, communication and commitment  towards achieving the overall  
long -term goal. Fortunately, progress has already been made on a number 
of fronts , including the overall number of EV’s within the borough, rising 
by approximately 315 vehicles,  meaning carbon savings of 467.63 tco2e  
this year  against the initial baseline.  
 
Key achievements  
• During the Summer new electric vehicle charging points installed 
include two new points at Matthews Green Schools and five new 
points at Arborfield School (three in the school and two at the 
community c ar parks).  
• One new Electric Vehicle Charging Point (EVCP) was installed at 
Bulmershe Leisure Centre in October 2020 and two new EVCP were 
installed in Elms Field in December 2020.  
• Multiple other new charging points have now been planned for  and 
continue to be explored in a rolling programme.  
• Process underway to align all charging across the borough to a 
standardised system  
• Feasibility study Electric Vehicle Overview and Benchmarking was 
completed by WSP in December 2020. The report sets out the EV 
background (EV, chargers, different ownership, operation and 
management models etc.)  along with benchmarking compared the   activities that other neighbouring councils have undertaken in relation 
to EVs.  The report also presents available funding op portunities, 
review of existing EV infrastructure in Wokingham and provides 
recommendations for the future.  
 
Our Partners  
For each target , the council has engaged with partners to ensure these are 
incorporated into existing plans and maximising their potential for success. 
Town s & parish c ouncil s, energy suppliers , residents, car parks , local 
businesses and consultants/subcontractors are key  for the delivery of this 
plan.  
 
Behavioural change is vital to encouraging the uptake in EVs and thereby 
reducing carbon emissions as listed next to the actions below. To bring this 
about, stakeholder engagement will be key to the uptake in use of new 
and improved infrastructure such as improved access to charging points. 
Co-benefits such as cleaner air will be effectively communicated to both 
businesses and residents.  
 
Consumption Emissions  
With the transition to electric vehicles there would be no associated 
consumption emissions within scope for households.  
 
Future Opportunities  
In this sector government advice and funding available continues to 
improve, while a  variety of new government led policies have recently 
been announced which may improv e the future effectiveness and 
likelihoods of these actions, including the ban on vehicles being brought 
forward, the environment bill, and the sixth carbon budget report , 
including developments in EV infrastructure and hydrogen power . 
Therefore, as each o f these develops, they will influence the below actions 
and scope of such. This is a live document, meaning as these developments 
are introduced they will be incorporated and actions adapted, assessing 
throughout what opportunities are available to maximis e the potential 
benefits, such as s tandardising  electric vehicle charging across boroughs  
and the ORCS  expanded charging schemes.   SDG S 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 32  
 REF Action  Description  / Outcome  Co-Benefits/  Unintended 
Consequences  Milestone  Timeline  Carbon 
savings 
tCO2e  Project 
Cost  (£) RAG  
T7 Target 7.  50% EVs registered in the Borough by 203 0  45000      
7.1 To develop an EV 
strategy for 
Wokingham 
Borough  Borough wide stra tegy to specify the 
infrastructure for EV charging poi nt to 
encourage the uptake of EV s.  
 
Map the existing EV chargers across the 
Borough and on council property.  
 
Obtain a baseline on current electric 
vehicle market, current ownership, 
forecast growth and charging 
infrastructure technologically.  
 
Develop and agree policy for E V charge 
point provision, which will maximise 
uptake of EV.  
 
Assess the potential for an integrate d 
network of EV charge points. T his would 
include encouraging the installation of EV 
charging points at motorway service areas 
and at large fuel retailers  
 
Specific carbon savings cannot be 
attributed to the strategy as a document, 
but can be attributed to the actions that it 
sets out.  Improved air quality, reduce 
NOx, PM10s, PM25 , cheaper 
to maintain and run , better 
driving experience . Also 
supports more constant 
energy usage for overall 
lower emissions from 
production.  
 
Despite covid  and traditional 
car sales declining in the 
pandemic, EV sales have risen  
across the board.  Carry out initial assessment of the EV 
requirements for the Bo rough  
Short  
term  Included in 
total    
  
  Nil  
 
Instruct consultant on requirements baseline and 
create  a brief to commission expert work  Nil 
Create a business case for funding  Nil 
Consultant provides draft EV report  
Progress: This has been completed by WSP  TBC 
Consult on report - recommendations for 
determining the best approach to providing 
charging solutions for the public.  Nil 
Establish  policy, processes  and protocol for 
responding to requests for charge points and 
how they can be operated and maintained.  
Progress: Multiple new charging points have 
been installed, with more planned in a rolling 
programme.  Nil 
Agreeing partnerships, income streams and 
service providers to ensure best uptake  Nil 
Produce EV strategy report and present to senior 
leadership team s for approval  Nil 
Present strategy for approval  Nil 
7.2 Provide a 
uniform method 
of accessing 
public and 
private charge 
points  Set up the back office so that EV chargers 
are accessible and easy to use to 
encourage more people to use  them. 
Provide  accurate  standardised public 
information on how to locate, u se and pay 
for chargers in the B orough.   
 
Carbon savings cannot be achieved without 
this. 
  Able to monitor power usage 
to ensure reliability . 
Opportunity for 
communication with user s. Investigate the types of back office payment  
systems used by the industry a nd assess the best 
option to be implemented at WBC . 
Harmonised EV related contracts such as 
electricity, maintenance, service and back office.  
 
Progress: Consultation has begun with various 
potential providers for the required complex 
software  Short 
term  
 Included in 
total    
  Nil   
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 33  
 REF Action  Description  / Outcome  Co-Benefits/  Unintended 
Consequences  Milestone  Timeline  Carbon 
savings 
tCO2e  Project 
Cost  (£) RAG  
7.3 Review the 
residential 
charge point 
infrastructure for 
those who have 
communal 
parking facilities 
such as flatted 
developments  Currently, 27% residential buildings 
(approximately 12,000 households ) do not 
have off -street parking and therefore 
direct access to safely charging an EV 
vehicle. This represents a barrier for these 
occupants to own an EV and so reduce s the 
uptake of EVs in the Borough.   
 
Initial pilo t: 18 new charging point s for 
residents generating an estimate d of 77.6 
tCO 2e annual savings  Opportunity for 
communication with non -EV 
users.   First stage: Implement a pilot of EV charging 
points in selected location, aim at installing 18 
new charging points for residents with 
communal parking facilities.   
Short 
term  77.6  TBC  
Second stage:  Based on the experience gain ed 
during stage 1, the council will seek to extend 
charging point facilities across the Borough . Long term  77.6  TBC 
7.4 Ensure that all 
EV ch arging 
points installed 
in the B orough 
are 'smart ready' 
to balance the 
electricity load 
demands on the 
grid.  Ensure that charge points are smart ready 
by setting requirements prohibiting 
installation of charge points unless they 
meet certain load management 
specifications.  
Establish the parameters for the 
management of available energy in an area 
through methods like dynamic load 
balancing or local storage systems . 
 
This will ensure reliability of power supply 
in the system. Maintaining confidence in 
the network and increasing the uptake of 
EVs. Overall c arbon savings cannot be 
achieved without this. Able to monitor power usage 
to ensure reliability  Identification of dynamic load balancing or local 
storage systems that could be implemented in 
WBC  
 
Progress: Site selection process has begun  Medium 
term  
Included in 
total   Nil   
Engage with service providers about generic 
support for WBC EV chargers through standards 
such as OCCP.  
 
Progress: Analysis complete on current EV 
provisions and process in place  Short 
term  
7.5 Support local 
businesses, 
including 
commercial 
property owners, 
to transition 
their commercial 
fleets to EV. Also Consult with local businesses to 
understand needs, including taxi fleets, to 
develop the required charging 
infrastructure  to support the uptake of 
EVs.  
Support the transition  of 20% vehicles  used 
for commercial purposes to ultra -low or 
electric.  Improved air quality, reduce 
NOx, PM10s, PM25, cheaper 
to maintain and run, better 
driving experience. Also 
supports more constant 
energy usage for overall 
lower emissions from 
production.   Engage local business with Workplace Charging 
Scheme  
Medium 
term    
1,834.6   
  
  Nil  
Provide information on salary sacrifice schemes 
to support employees to transition to EV  Nil 
Assess opportunities to support the 
development of plug -in taxi programs within the 
Borough, considering the requirements for 
charge points.  Nil  
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 34  
 REF Action  Description  / Outcome  Co-Benefits/  Unintended 
Consequences  Milestone  Timeline  Carbon 
savings 
tCO2e  Project 
Cost  (£) RAG  
to encourage 
employees to 
switch to EV for 
private use  This i ncludes applying for grants and  
funding for purchase and installation cost, 
etc. Guide and advice  local businesses 
about the benefits of transitioning to EV s. 
 
This will achieve savings of 1,834.6  tCO 2e Deliver a sustained campaign to inspire residents 
and local businesses to 'Go Ultra Low' and 
transition to EVs  Nil 
7.6 Promote uptake 
of EVs with our 
residents 
through 
engagement  Support and educate our residents about 
the benefits of transitioning to EV s. Make 
available information that will support 
residents in taking the decision to 
transition to EVs, including government 
schemes that will support residents in the 
installation of EV charging points.  
 
60% of residential buildings have parking 
facilities, 46,800 households. Overall 
carbon savings cannot be achieved without 
this. Improved air quality, reduce 
NOx, PM10s, PM25, cheaper 
to maintain and run, better 
driving experience. Also 
supports more constant 
energy usage for overall 
lower emissions from 
production.  Deliver a sustained campaign to inspire residents 
to 'Go Ultra Low' and transition to EVs.  Medium 
term  Included in 
total             Nil  
7.7 Coordinate the 
installation of EV 
charging points 
into private and 
commercial 
owned land in 
line with the EV 
network plan 
approved in the 
strategy.  Investigate the requirements  to install EV 
charge points to commercial property such 
as business parks, shopping centres, etc.  
 
The carbon savings are yet to be calculated 
but incorporated in the overall figure.  Improved air quality, reduce 
NOx, PM10s, PM25, cheaper 
to maintain and run, better 
driving experience. Also 
supports more constant 
energy usage for overall 
lower emissions from 
production.  Align the EVs installation requirements to the 
building retrofitting programs.  
 
Progress: EV standards from highways design 
guide is being used. Feasibility study on 
additional car parks underway.  Medium 
term  TBC  TBC   
T8 Target 8. Council's car fleet becomes entirely ultra -low emission by 2028 producing 45t CO 2e savings    45.2     
8.1 
  Ensuring 100% of  
the car fleet 
operated by the 
council is ultra -
low emission by 
2028  Leading the way by transitioning the 16 
WBC owned and leased vehicles to EV or 
low carbon vehicles at the end of their 
leasing contract/ life.   
Vehicles  range from minibuses, cars and a 
tractor in Dinton Pastures.  
 Helps set the example by 
leading the way.  Opportunity 
for communication with non -
EV private  users.   Deliver the programme to transition WBC owned 
vehicles to be ultra -low vehicles by 2028 . 
The Street Cleansing team have trialled an 
electric street sweeper with good results . Medium 
term    
  
45.2  
  TBC  
Review lease contracts and establish a 
programme for transitioning leased vehicles to 
EV when engaging in new contract s TBC  
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 35  
 REF Action  Description  / Outcome  Co-Benefits/  Unintended 
Consequences  Milestone  Timeline  Carbon 
savings 
tCO2e  Project 
Cost  (£) RAG  
This will achieve savings of  45.2.6 tCO 2e Embed requirements for EV’s or Low Emission 
vehicles in WBC Fleet Guidelines Policy and WBC 
Vehicle Procurement Guidelines.  Nil 
Update the V ehicle Procurement Application 
form to include the consideration of EV’s or Low 
Emission vehicles as a standard with no sign off 
from  the Board for any vehicle that does not 
meeting this requirement.  Nil 
8.2 Installed EV 
charging points 
into council 
owned buildings 
in line with the 
EV network plan 
approved in the 
strategy.  EV network plan will have standardised  EV 
charging point requirements to make 
charging easy to access . 
 
To support this ensure all council -owned 
assets comply with the standard. Include 
locations such as libraries , leisure centres, 
parks, etc.  
 
Specific carbon savings can be attributed to 
the retrofitting of each building depending 
of the installation requi rements of EV 
charge points.  Improved air quality, reduce 
NOx, PM10s, PM25, cheaper 
to maintain and run, better 
driving experience. Also 
supports more constant 
energy usage for overall 
lower emissions from 
production.  Align the EVs installation requirement s to the 
building retrofitting programs.   
 
 
Short 
term  
 Project 
specific  TBC  
8.3 Establish 
contractual 
policies that 
promote the use 
of EV or ultra -
low emissions 
vehicles as the 
council's 
preferable 
vehicles , 
including on 
education and Ensuring all our contractors use ultra -low 
of EV when possible will reduce emissions 
from contractors and suppliers vehicles 
working for and in partnership with the 
council . This includes  Education and Social 
Care tr ansport providers to 
encourage/ specify transition to ultra -low 
vehicles for use on HTST transport.  
 
50% (which exceeds the statutory 
minimum of 35%) contract transport fleet 
will be hybrid or fully electric by 2028.  
 Improved air qual ity, reduce 
NOx, PM10s, PM25, cheaper 
to maintain and run, better 
driving experience. Also 
supports more constant 
energy usage for overall 
lower emissions from 
production.  Opportunity for 
communication with non -EV 
users.  Include in procurement policies considerations 
for EV/ultra -low emission vehicles as a standard.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Medium 
term  Project 
specific  
  Nil  
All buyers/ commissioners to apply contractual 
policies when subcontracting services   
Nil 
Review the contracts with our transport 
providers and establish requirements to 
transition to ultra -low emissions vehicles   
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 36  
 REF Action  Description  / Outcome  Co-Benefits/  Unintended 
Consequences  Milestone  Timeline  Carbon 
savings 
tCO2e  Project 
Cost  (£) RAG  
 social care 
services  Specific carbon savings can be attributed to 
each contractor depending of their size 
fleet and type of service provided . Optimise HTST routes to reduce mileag e  
T9 Target 9. 100% new buildings are EV ready from 2022        
9.1 Make all new 
houses electric 
vehicle ready by 
establishing 
requirements for 
EV charging 
points in new 
dwellings as 
described in the 
EV strategy  Establish the requirement for EV charging 
point infrastru cture for new dwellings in 
the B orough where appropriate.  
Make sure that new homes planning 
applications submitted from 202 3 and 
where appropriate, have a charge point 
available. This will ensure there is no 
barrier for new homeowners  or occupants 
of new dwellings to own or leased an 
electric vehicle.  Developers w ill have to 
ensure there is sufficient power serving 
their developments.  Overall c arbon savings 
cannot be achieved without this. Improved air quality, reduce 
NOx, PM10s, PM25, cheaper 
to maintain and run, better 
driving experience. Also 
supports more constant 
energy usage for overall 
lower emissions from 
production.  Opportunity for 
communication with non -EV 
users.  Publish policy as part of the adopted Local Plan.  
 
Developers to be informed of policy and 
requirements  shall be listed in planning 
applicat ion 
 
New developers to ensure that there is sufficient 
power serving new developments.   
 
 
 
Medium 
term  Included in 
total  Nil   
 
*Action 7.8. Note, t his action has been removed and it was explored and the decision made not to take it forward . Full details are included in the methodology.  
 
 
 
 
   
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 37  
 Air Quality  
 
Carbon savings:  Carbon savings for air quality targets are reported in the  
transport  section as actions overlap.   
 
Wokingham Borough Council ’s efforts over the last year have focus ed on 
tackl ing the levels of air pollutants, particularly in the Air Quality 
Management Areas in the borough. Mitigations to tackle all pollutants 
including Particulate Matter 2.5 (PM2.5) and Nitrogen oxides  (NOx) align 
with measures to reduce carbon emissions in the borough such as  by 
reducing idling, congestion and increasing awareness through education , 
to name a few.  
 
At this time the Air Quality Agenda has focused on raising awareness and 
behaviour change around the issues associated with air quality, with 
specific carbon savings yet to be seen as a result. We can, however, 
assume that levels of CO 2 emitted from vehicl es in the borough will have 
fallen in line with the fall  seen in NOx  levels. Unfortunately, CO 2 is not 
monitored in the same way. Over the course of the next year, as 
intervention s such as the no -idling zones and ITS systems are 
implemented, we are expecti ng to be able to calculate more specific 
savings from these interventions.  
 
Key Achievements  
• Changes in travel behaviours due to lockdown restrictions have 
resulted in a downward trend in NO 2 emissions, evidenced in Q1, Q2 
& Q3 of 2020/21 in both Peach Str eet and at Twyford crossroads 
compared to the year before.  
• Funding secured to scale up air quality monitoring by placing more 
units around the borough to measure PM2.5.  
• Mobile diffusion tubes have been placed at 6 schools in the Borough 
as part of the Ec o-Travel Officer programme.  
• Schools competition for no -idling banners was completed and two 
styles of banners have been printed and installed at hotspot locations 
for congestion and idling such as outside Wokingham Train Station and 
along school railings.   • The Public Protection Partnership have been awarded £259K from the 
DEFRA Air Quality grant programme to deliver a project to make 
improvements to air quality across the three council areas covered by 
PPP. Behaviour change will be a key focus of the projec t. 
 
Our Partners  
The Public Protection Partnership has been  a key partner for the delivery 
of these projects . We have work ed very closely with local schools in 
particularly in the Air Quality Management Areas and collaborated with 
our towns and parish council’s, residents, and local businesses .   
 
Behaviour change will be very important to encourage the necessary mode 
shift towards active travel in order to improve air quality by working with 
partners listed above and particularly schools. There is currently  a great 
opportunity at this time to maintain some of these shifts in travel 
behaviours.  
 
Consumption Emissions  
These are out of scope carbon emissions relating to the air quality agenda 
that must be taken into consideration. This includes out of borough road, 
rail and air travel as well as the purchased we make which are transported 
to the shops we buy from or when  we purchase online, including food 
miles.  
 
Future Opportunities  
Changes in travel behaviours due to lockdown restrictions have resulted in 
a downward trend in NO 2 emissions, evidenced in Q1, Q2 & Q3 of 2020/21 
in both Peach Street and at Twyford crossroads , compared to the year 
before .  
 
Nationally , the Environment Bill  includes key measures on air quality.  The 
Secretary of State will be required to periodically re view the national Air 
Quality Strategy for England, the government will need to set 2 new 
targets to reduce annual levels of PM 2.5 , local authorities will have new 
powers, including to declare an Air Quality Management Area (AQMA) and 
establish plans to reduce public exposure to air pollution which exceeds 
air quality targets.   SDG S 
 
 
 
 
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 38  
 REF Action  Description /Outcome s Co-Benefits/Unintended 
Consequences  Milestone /Progress  Time Scale   Annual Carbon 
Savings  tCO 2e Project 
Cost  RAG  
T10 Target 1 0. Reduce NO2 concentration by 50% against 2019 baseline in the three AQ management areas by 2025   TBC     
10.1  Continue air quality 
monitoring for NO 2 
concentration in air 
quality management 
areas  There are 47 locations across the 
Borough. The Public Protection 
Partnership (PPP) set up a target to 
reduce Nitrogen Dioxide emissions 
from transport in Wokingham 
Town Centre and Twyford 
Crossroads.  
 
Monitoring which is overseen by 
Defra has shown a reduction of 
NO 2 levels in Wokingham Town 
Centre, Twyford Crossroads and 
the 60m either side of the M4 
throughout the whole of the 
Borough over the last 6 years to 
2018.  
 
Monitoring allows us to assess the 
levels of pollution so we can 
increase the effort to reduce 
pollutants in the most affected 
areas  Public health benefits  through 
reducing the risk of respiratory 
diseases and irritation, 
particularly impacting the 
vulnerable population.  
 
The lockdown restrictions 
associated with the Covid -19 
pandemic have resulted in an 
unsustainable drop in year on 
year percentage change in NOx 
levels in monitored areas.  Continue implementing pollution 
prevention and control inspections 
required at Local Air Quality 
Management (LAQM) as set out in Part 
IV of the Environment Act (1995).  
The Air Quality Annual Status Report is 
published annually and provides an 
update of the monitoring results for the 
LAQM.  
 
The PPP has been awarded a £259k 
grant to deliver  various projects focusing 
on improving air quality across the 3 
authority areas  including more 
monitoring.  On going  Monitoring at 
Peach Street 
and Twyford 
Crossroads in 
2020 has seen 
average 
monthly  year on 
year fall s in NO 2 
of 40% and 28% 
respectively and 
would expect to  
see similar falls 
in CO 2 
emissions   Nil  
10.2  Changes to how we 
manage and control 
the traffic in the 
Borough  Use intelligent traffic systems to 
allow the traffic signals at Twyford 
crossroads to respond to reduce air 
pollutants concentration and 
therefore CO2e emissions.  
 
Result in reduced congestion and 
resulting emissions through 
improving traffic flow in the most 
traffic heavy areas. If successful, 
this technology could become 
more widely used at other 
junctions in the Borough.  Reduce congestion in the 
borough.  
 
Public health benefits through 
reducing the risk of respiratory 
diseases and irritation, 
particularly impacting the 
vulnerable population.  Prepare Intelligent traffic signals (ITS) 
strategy for Twyford Crossr oads which is 
a priority location for ITS. Cameras in AQ 
detectors to be installed on Twyford 
Crossroads  Short term  Work currently 
ongoing to 
calculate the 
estimated 
carbon savings 
from the whole 
ITS scheme and 
will be 
published within 
the upcoming 
ITS Strategy. 
Case studies 
suggest a 11 -
17% saving.  £13M  
assigned to 
managing 
congestion 
& pollution  
Of this £3M 
currently 
being used 
for ITS    
Develop preliminary design 
Easthampstead Road – Complete  Short term  TBC  
London Road Corridor identify as an 
adaptive traffic management corridor  – 
Underway : Short  term TBC   
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 39  
 REF Action  Description /Outcome s Co-Benefits/Unintended 
Consequences  Milestone /Progress  Time Scale   Annual Carbon 
Savings  tCO 2e Project 
Cost  RAG  
Traffic signals upgrades, CCTV cameras, 
and software improvements have  
commence d. 
Carry out a study to assess transport 
movements in Twyford in particular 
routes. Specifically for lorries and heavy -
duty vehicles.  
This will be deliver ed through freight 
management work . Short term   £40K   
Produce a parking management study at 
Twyford to identify opportunities to 
reduce unnecessary travel into Twyford 
when possible.   
Commence d but  delayed by C ovid. 
Expected delivery by April 2022  Medium 
Term  TBC £60K   
Traffic reassignment scheme to be 
delivered in three phases  
Follow Network hierarchy – day to day 
traffic  Medium 
Term  TBC TBC  
Speed Management program me to be 
delivered in three phases : 
First phase completed – review of speed 
limits  
 
Second phase underway – revision  
 
Third phase : Implementation – 
dependant on hierarchy   Short term  TBC 
£10M   
   Medium 
Term  TBC 
10.3  Implementation of air 
quality mitigation 
projects  Using the data from the air quality 
monitoring work above, air quality 
hot spots have been identified in 
the Borough.  
 
Reduce NO 2 emissions from 
transport in Wokingham Town  
Centre and Twyford Crossroads  Public health benefits through 
reducing the risk of respiratory 
diseases and irritation, 
particularly impacting the 
vulnerable population.  
 These plans  have recently been sent to 
Defra for  its annual assessment and will 
confirm if  it is satisfied with the progress 
made against them.  
 
The PPP has been awarded a £259k 
grant to deliver various projects focusing 
on improving air quality across the 3  Future projects 
will focus on 
behaviour 
change and 
have associated 
carbon 
emissions 
savings to be   
TBC  
    
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 40  
 REF Action  Description /Outcome s Co-Benefits/Unintended 
Consequences  Milestone /Progress  Time Scale   Annual Carbon 
Savings  tCO 2e Project 
Cost  RAG  
Increased awareness of the air 
quality issue through various 
mitigation projects.  authority areas including more 
monitoring.   calculated once 
projects are 
scoped.  
 
  
Commissioned study to identify further 
air quality improvement measures for 
Twyford Crossroads which will feed into 
a further action plan . Report completed.   Short term  PPP  
A Smart Living Pillar installed in Twyford 
as a pilot to improve air quality. Pillar 
installed in November 2019 as part of a 
pilot project.  Short term  Small levels 
sequestered 
through 
associated road -
side planting  External 
organisati
on  
Assessment of measures to be 
implemented in Twyford and extend 
into surrounding areas.  Review 
undertaken by WBC Air Quality Working 
Group with decision made to focus on 
the key actions to improve air quality  
most efficiently in the h otspots for 
pollutants . Intervention method  to be 
implemented and linked with 
improvements in traffic signalling.  Medium 
term  Neutral  Nil  
T11 Target 11. Educate public on how they can actively improve air quality whilst reducing carbon emissions        
11.1  Engage the public with 
air quality matters by 
providin g information 
through campaigns 
and activities  Working with schools to increase 
awareness of air quality issues 
though running a competition to 
produce signs, stickers and leaflets 
to be distr ibuted across the 
Borough with focus on hotspots . 
 
Reduce air pollutants 
concentration and consequently 
CO 2e emissions  Public health benefits through 
reducing the risk of respiratory 
diseases and irritation, 
particularly impacting the 
vulnerable population.  
 
Increased awareness of the air 
quality issue through various 
mitigation projects.  Run communications campaig ns that 
include subjects such as Myths & f acts of 
idling , Home air quality . 
Increase awareness of the impact  of 
poor air quality on health.  
 
There have been 2 comms campaigns. 
Clean Air Day is upcoming.  Short term   Neutral – 
Raising 
awareness 
through 
engagement 
means we can 
achieve 
accelerated 
carbon savings 
accounted for in 
the other 
targets.  Nil  
Run a school s air quality competition, to 
engage children, parents and local 
residents with air quality issues related 
to idling.  Small cost 
of 
banners   
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 41  
 REF Action  Description /Outcome s Co-Benefits/Unintended 
Consequences  Milestone /Progress  Time Scale   Annual Carbon 
Savings  tCO 2e Project 
Cost  RAG  
Completed for 2020, created 2 styles of 
banners to be installed in key areas, 
including Twyford crossroads, 
Wokingham station and around school s. 
Promote active travel initiatives across 
10 schools in the area including 6 with 
mobile diffuser units to monitor air 
quality.   
6 schools have been given diffusion 
tubes for measuring air quality  alongside 
virtual lesson plan s to raise awareness of  
air pollution.  Partly 
funded 
through 
DEFRA  
11.2  Reduce idling  Improve signage around key spots 
such a s schools, taxi spots, 
stations.  
 
Engaged children with idling  issues . 
  
Raise public awareness about the 
relationship between improving ai r 
quality and CO 2 emissions.  Public health benefits through 
reducing the risk of respiratory 
diseases and irritation, 
particularly impacting the 
vulnerable population.  
 
Increased awareness of the air 
quality issue through v arious 
mitigation projects.  Introduce an 'emissions and idling policy' 
in the Borough . Medium 
term  
Anticipate a 25% 
reduction in 
emissions from 
commercial 
vehicles  Nil  
Implementing No -Vehicle -Idling zones, 
around as many schools in the Borough 
as possible, by the end of 2022, and in 
other identified areas such as taxi ranks , 
GP surgeries,  and close to level 
crossings . Signage has been approved 
and locations for the zones are  being 
confirmed.  Medium 
term  Cost of 
metal 
plates and 
enforce -
ment   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 42  
 Renewable Energy Generation  
 
Carbon savings : 20tCO2e  
 
Over the last year, Wokingham Borough Council has worked in setting the 
ground to deliver projects that will increase the generation of renewable 
energy across the Borough. Our targets to increase generation of 
renewable energy through investing in solar farms and to support the 
generation of renewable energy in the Borough remain.  
 
The council has also delivered the installation of renewable energy 
systems in public buildings and is planni ng to continue on this trajectory.   
 
Our Key Achievements  
 
• The first solar farm in Barkham Ride will generate 32MWh’s a year and 
has the potential to save around 6,325 tCO2 per year when compared 
to using traditional fossil fuels.  
• The Wokingham Community Energy scheme was approved by 
Executive in January 2021. The scheme will encourage sustainable 
energy projects, allow residents and local organisation to invest in 
green energy and help tackle the climate emergency.  
 
Our Partners  
 
The delivery of the projects listed in our action plan will not be possible 
without the support and collaboration of the towns and parish council’s, 
residents, local businesses, suppliers, the national grid, public energy 
suppliers. For the delivery of t he first solar farm, the council has work ed 
closely with SSE, DBO, the farmers, specialist consultants and the local 
community.  
 
  In order to achieve the actions below, the council is aware that 
engagement will be key to encourage behaviour change needed to achieve 
the goals below. Raising awareness about the benefits of renewable 
energy generation bring to both the environment, and what that means in 
tangible terms as well as co -benefits such as more green employment and 
skills opportunities in the local labour market.   
 
Consumption Emissions  
 
Total life cycle GHG emissions from solar PV systems are similar to other 
renewables and nuclear energy, and much lower than coal . These 
emissions are not considered in the action plan below.  
 
Future Opportunities  
 
The Government energy white paper, and new commitments identified in 
the 10 Point P lan for a Green Industrial Revolution  will bring new 
opportunities and stronger target s to promote renewable energy 
generation. As this is a recent policy , and still under development, we will 
closely track its progress.   
 
For example, part of this 10 point  plan includes quadrupling wind power 
production to 40GW by 2030, sufficient to power all current homes and 4x 
the current capacity. Therefore, should this be delivered, it will represent 
a fall in emissions on the BAU scenario.  
  SDG S 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 43  
 REF Action  Description /Outcome s Co-Benefits/Unintended 
Consequences  Milestone  Timescale  Carbon 
Savings  
tCO 2 Estimated 
Project 
Cost  RAG  
T12 Target 1 2. Increase the generation of renewable energy through investment in solar farms to power the equivalent of 25,000 homes withi n the 
Borough by 2030 saving approximately 25,560 tCO 2  25,560   £21M   
12.1 Deliver the installation of a 
solar farm in Barkham  with the 
capacity to generate in excess 
of 36 MW p of energy.  Installation of a large -scale solar 
farm on council owned land will 
allow the council to offset its 
carbon emissions from electricity 
and gas u sage and possibly 'retail' 
any excess.  
 
Large scale solar farm installed in 
Barkham  with the potential of 
generating 36MWp output 
achieving 34,500,000 kWh’s per 
annum  by 2023 . 
 
Estimated carbon savings 7,970 
tCO 2 
Potential to feed 8,000 homes .  Planning status of the land would 
remain unchanged with it 
reverting back to farmland after 
the solar farm reaches the end of 
its lifespan . 
 
Generation of green energy 
locally  
 
15,000 new trees on the 
farmland  will be planted  
 
New route for walkers, cyclists 
and horse -riders  are being 
considered  
  Asset review board to the potential sites - 
consultant briefing for review of master 
planning of specific sites - With WSP for 
land planning now.  
Short  term  7,970   £21M   
Options appraisal - commission 
specifications of the project to 
procurement team   
Site tenant notice - one year notice   
Initial procurements process - identify the 
contractor - framework and due diligence 
process - 6 months   
Planning application - full application 
submission – completed   
Consultation processes with local residents 
is undergoing   
Project delivery - Construction of solar farm 
- Project management   
Start operation  expected by December 
2023   
12.2 Deliver the installation of a 
solar farm in Site 2 with the 
capacity to generate in excess 
of 20 MWh of energy.  Installation of a large scale solar 
farm on council owned land will 
allow the council to offset its  
carbon emissions from electricity 
and gas usage and possibly 'retail' 
any excess.  
 
Installation of solar farm in Site 2 
with  the potential of generating 
20+ MWh generation by 2025 . 
 
Estimated Carbon savings 5,112 
tCO 2e 
Potential to feed 5,000 homes . Generat ion of  green energy 
locally  
Direct way to reduce carbon 
emissions  
 
Surplus power is feed to the 
mains grid thereby distributing 
clean energy  locally  
 
Planning status of the land would 
remain unchanged with it 
reverting back to farmland after 
the solar farm reaches the end of 
its lifespan   Asset review board to the potential sites - 
consultant briefing for review of master 
planning of specific sites  
Mediu m 
term    
  
  
+/- 5,112   
  
  
  
  TBC  
Options appraisal - commission 
specifications of the project to 
procurement team   
Site tenant notice - one year notice   
Initial procurements process - identify the 
contractor - framework and due diligence 
process - 6 months   
Planning application - full application 
submission   
Consultation processes with local residents   
Project delivery - Construction of solar farm 
- Project management   
Start operation    
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 44  
 REF Action  Description /Outcome s Co-Benefits/Unintended 
Consequences  Milestone  Timescale  Carbon 
Savings  
tCO 2 Estimated 
Project 
Cost  RAG  
12.3 Deliver the installation of a 
solar farm in Site 3 with the 
capacity to generate in excess 
of 20 MWh of energy.  Installation of a large scale solar 
farm on council owned land will 
allow the council to offset its 
carbon emissions from electricity 
and gas usage and possibly 'retail' 
any excess.  
 
Insta llation of solar farm in Site 3  
with  the potential of generating 
20+ MWh by 2027 . 
 
Estimated Carbon savings 5,112 
tCO 2e with the potential to feed 
5,000 homes . Generation of green energy 
locally  
Direct way to reduce carbon 
emissions  
 
Surplus power is feed to the 
mains grid thereby distributing 
clean energy  locally  
 
Planning status of the land would 
remain unchanged with it 
reverting back to farmland after 
the sol ar farm reaches the end of 
its lifespan  Asset review board to the potential sites - 
consultant briefing for review of master 
planning of specific sites  
Medium 
term    
  
  
 +/- 5,112   
  
  
  
  TBC  
Options appraisal -  commission  
specifications of the project to 
procurement team   
Site tenant notice - one year notice   
Initial procurements process -  identify  the 
contractor - framework and due diligence 
process - 6 months   
Planning application - full application 
submission   
Consultation processes with local residents   
Project delivery - Construction of solar farm 
- Project management   
Start operation   
12.4 Deliver the installation of a 
solar farm in Site 4 with the 
capacity to generate in excess 
of 20 MWh of energy.  Installation of a large -scale  solar 
farm on council owned land would  
allow the council to offset its 
carbon emissions from electricity 
and gas usage and possibly 'retail' 
any excess.  
 
Insta llation of solar farm in Site 4  
with  the potential of generating 
20+ MWh by 2030 . 
 
Estimated Carbon savings 5,112 
tCO 2e 
potential to feed 5,000 homes . Generation of green energy 
locally  
Direct way to reduce carbon 
emissions  
 
Surplus power is feed to the 
mains grid thereby distributing 
clean energy  locally  
 
Planning status of the land would 
remain unchanged with it 
reverting back to farmland after 
the solar farm reaches the end of 
its lifespan   Asset review board to the potential sites - 
consultant briefing for review of master 
planning of specific sites  
Mediu m 
term    
  
  
  
  
+/- 5,112   
  
  TBC  
Options appraisal -  commission 
specifications of the project to 
procurement team   
Site tenant notice - one year notice   
Initial procurements process -  identify  the 
contractor - framework and due diligence 
process - 6 months   
Planning application - full application 
submission   
Consultation processes with local residents   
Project delivery - Construction of solar farm 
- Project management   
Start operation  
    
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 45  
 REF Action  Description /Outcome s Co-Benefits/Unintended 
Consequences  Milestone  Timescale  Carbon 
Savings  
tCO 2 Estimated 
Project 
Cost  RAG  
T13 Target 13. Support the generation of renewable ene rgy in the Borough to generate the equivalent of  2500 kWh per household in 2030, this will 
result in carbon savings of approximately 44,666.3   27,333.46    
13.1 Set up a  Community Energy 
Fund for Wokingham  (WEC) A Community Energy Fund will help 
accelerate the uptake of renewable 
energy generation within the 
Borough. It will allow the council to 
engage with the community in the 
journey to net -zero carbon.  
The WCEF funds renewable energy 
installations through local shares 
from the community, enabling 
individuals and local organisations 
to support and benefit from the 
scheme . 
 
The scheme aims to generate an 
average of 27,000 kWh/year of 
renewable energy from the 
installation of small -scale PV 
systems funded through this 
scheme.  
 
Estimated carbon savings per year 
6.90 tCO 2e 
Estimated car bon savings for ten 
years 69  tCO 2e Enable residents and the 
community to become investors 
in renewable energy   
installations.  
 
Facilitate access to external 
funding to cover the cost of 
renewable energy installations 
across the Borough.  
 
Projects can be wholly owned by 
the community  
 
Support the creation of new 
gree n jobs in the area  
 
Help to increase the premium of 
renewable energy technologies 
by increasing uptake  The scheme was approved by the council 
in January 2021 . 
 
The scheme will be launch by summer 
2021  
 
WBC will partner with Wokingham 
Energy Community (WEC) and will put 
forward  potential buildings that could be 
considered for the scheme. These will 
include schools without solar P V, Young 
and Community Centres , etc. 
 
An annual report will be provided by 
WEC and Enery4all one year after it has 
been launched – summer 2022  Short term   69 Nil  
13.2 Support residents and local 
businesses to reduce their 
energy usage and carbon 
emissions and increase the 
uptake of green  energy  Develop a comprehensive service 
to residents and local businesses, 
offering green energy provision, as 
well as energy efficiency measures, 
consultancy and advice  
Provide a scheme which allows for 
Public and businesses to 'buy' Wider uptake of green energy 
will reduce the green premiums 
and allow more people to access 
cheaper green energy tariffs  Feasibility assessment for the council to 
commence a ‘Green label’ energy 
procurement initiative for all borough 
residents / businesses . Short term  
TBC   TBC   
Development of the scheme, initial 
conversations with potential partners  Short term    
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 46  
 REF Action  Description /Outcome s Co-Benefits/Unintended 
Consequences  Milestone  Timescale  Carbon 
Savings  
tCO 2 Estimated 
Project 
Cost  RAG  
Green electricity / Gas throu gh 
WBC (referral)  
 
Estimated uptake and carbon 
savings will be identify through the 
feasibility assessment.   Scheme approval by Executive and 
launch the scheme  Medium 
term   
13.3 Support the delivery of smart 
grid technologies  A modernise energy service 
through smart grid technologies 
and digital infrastructure  will 
provide more accurate information 
about  
energy consumption and costs , so 
consumers can easily understand 
how to save money on their bills.  
 
The project aims to monitor the 
benefits of energy management 
trials, implemented by Smarter 
Grid Solutions,  and to advise on 
future upscaling potential.  Digital infrastructure  
enable consumers to access 
innovative solutions such as 
smart tariffs. These tariffs reward 
consumers financially for using 
less electricity at peak times of 
demand or using more when 
overall demand is low and there 
is surplus gener ation available  Work in collaboration with ADEPT, UoR 
and the LEP to deliver initial research on 
test different control strategies / 
interventions.  Medium  
term  Nil Nil  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 47  
 Retrofitting Domestic and Commercial   
 
Carbon savings : 300tCO2e  
  
Over the last year, the council introduced and started the delivery of the 
Energy Company Obligation (ECO) and Green Homes Grant schemes . 
These seek to  support residents to reduce their energy usage and carbon 
emissions and increase the uptake of green energy technologies.  
 
Households who install energy saving measures will see significant 
savings in their energy bills and carbon emissions. M any of the 
households benefited will be l ow-income or vulnerable households on 
benefits, whose homes  currently have poor energy efficiency ratings . 
 
Despite  the limitations caused by lockdowns, c ouncil assets and schools 
have also been retrofitted . Feasibility assessments have been of pilot 
schemes in council houses and Woodley .  
 
 
Our Key Achievements  
• Over 500 properties have benefited from the ECO and GHG scheme s 
achieving potential carbon savings of 280 tCO2  per year.   
• Over  10 schools  retrofitted.     
Our Partners  
 
The delivery of the projects listed in our action plan will not be possible 
without partnering with Parish  & Town Councils , Residents, schools, 
subcontractors . 
 
Behaviour change will also be vital in supporting residents and businesses 
to retrofit their pr operties and Wokingham Borough Council  will work to 
raise awareness on how to make the best and most efficient choices and 
how to go about this through effective communication with 
stakeholders.  
 
Consumption Emissions  
 
Total life cycle GHG emissions from solar PV systems are similar to other 
renewables and nuclear energy, and much lower than coal . 
 
Future Opportunities  
 
The Government  energy  white paper, and new commitments identified 
in the 10 actions plan for green re covery will bring new opportunities and 
stronger targets to promote renewable energy generation. However, as 
this is recent policy and still under development, it will be closely 
monitor ed to support and strengthen our own targets.  
 
 
  SDG S 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 48  
 REF Action  Description  / Outcome  Co-Benefits/Unintended 
Consequences  Milestone  Timeline  Carbon 
Savings  tCO 2e Project 
Cost  RAG  
T14 Target 14. By 2028 All council building s, excluding schools , will be retrofitted to carbon neutral standards     6,612.30   4,500,000    
14.1 Improve energy 
performance of council 
owned buildings to 
carbon neutral standards  Implement a wide range of energy 
efficiency projects at existing 
properties to improve energy 
efficiency. These inc lude, installing 
LED lighting, Cavity Wall, loft 
insulation boiler controls etc., all to 
make the property ‘consume’ less 
energy . 
 
Programme for retrofitting 
corporate assets based on energy 
performance baseline and energy 
impro vement requirements.  
 
6,612.30 tCO 2e savings by 2028  
  Reduce cost of energy bills  
 
Support more jobs in the green 
and sustainability industries  
 
Emerging of new supply chains for 
building efficiency will reduce the 
cost of the green technologies such 
as heath pumps, batteries, solar 
panels, etc.    Have a baseline of energy 
performance for each council -
owned asset.  
Three year assessment, average 
kilowatt value (FY from 2017 -18, 18 -
19, 19 -20). Short -term  
6,612.30   4,500,000   
Identify energy performance 
improvement requirements to all 
corporate sites and recorded in the 
Corporate Assets Carbon Reduction 
Database . 
Medium 
term   
Set up a programme f or retrofitting 
assets.   
Carry  out a feasibility assessment on  
Woodley Library as a pilot project .  
Establish guidelines of energy 
improvements that can be used for 
all corporate assets .  
Deliver the retrofitting programme.   
14.2 Improve energy 
performance of council 
housing stock  There are ar ound 2,600 council 
owned housing units . We want to 
improve energy performance of 
council housing and incrementally 
reduce the use of domestic gas  and 
replace it with cleaner technologies . 
 
This will contribute to a reduction in 
energy bills and fuel poverty rates.  
 
Improve energy efficiency of council 
owned houses to improve EPC bands 
E,F & G  
 Improving the energy efficiency of 
our homes will mean households 
can significantly reduce  demand 
and save money on their bills.  
 
Reduce fuel poverty  rates  Survey the whol e stock to develop 
and energy benchmark.  
It is expected that the surveys will 
be completed by October 202 2 but 
this entirely depends on COVID -19 Short term  
  
Carbon 
savings  will be 
informed by 
the number 
and type of 
interventions 
delivered in 
each property  Nil  
Carry out assessment to Public 
Energy Supplier funding that could 
be use d to improve the energy 
profile of council housing . Short term  Nil   
Carry out an assessment to ECO 
(Energy Company Obligation) 
scheme and potential funding . Short term  Nil  
Pilot energy improvement work to a 
property increasing it from SAP D to 
B.  Short term  TBC   
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 49  
 REF Action  Description  / Outcome  Co-Benefits/Unintended 
Consequences  Milestone  Timeline  Carbon 
Savings  tCO 2e Project 
Cost  RAG  
Carbon savings  will be informed by 
the number and type of 
interventions delivered in each 
property  Carry out independen t EPC ratings 
for each property.  
This is dependent on budget 
allowances.  Medium 
term  TBC  
Establish and deliver a retrofitting 
program me for council  housing 
based on EPC baseline and available 
budgets.  
This will be informed by the stock 
survey  Medium 
term  TBC  
T15 Target 15. By 2029 all local schools to be retrofitted    5,034.08      
15.1 Upgrade various energy 
measures in the schools 
to improve their energy 
performance.  Schools retrofitting programme will 
be based on initial assessment.  
Works will typically include: LED 
lighting, Insulation measures, 
controls upgrades, heating upgrades 
/ replacements and Renewable 
Energy Generation technologies. 
Priority given to energy ‘payback’ 
calculations of less than five years 
against energy spend  
This will improve energy 
performance and has the potential 
to save 5,034.08  tCO 2e when 
completed  Improving the energy efficiency of 
our schools will significantly reduce  
demand and save money on their 
bills.  
 
Support more jobs in the green 
and sustainability industries  
 
Emerging of new supply chains for 
building efficiency will reduce the 
cost of the green technologies such 
as heath pumps, batteries, solar 
panels, etc.    Carry out energy audits to all 
schools to identify possible energy 
reduction projects.  Medium 
term  
 5,034.08    This 
project is 
included 
in the 
budget for 
retrofittin
g council 
property 
(4,500,00
0)  
   
Establish and deliver the schools 
retrofitting programme which will 
be based on carbon ‘paybacks’  Medium 
term   
T16 Target 16. By 2030, 20% of all houses in the borough to be retrofitted   35,446.0  75,0000    
16.1 Develop and deliver  
schemes to support 
retrofitting of homes  
Such as ECO (Energy 
Company Obligation) 
offering.  Support residents to reduce their 
energy usage and carbon emissions 
and increase the uptake of green 
energy technologies. This scheme 
will include energy efficienc y 
measures .  
 
More residents will be able to 
improve the energy efficiency of 
their properties and switch from gas 
to electricity  By improving the energy efficiency 
of our homes will mean 
households can significantly 
reduce  energy demand and save 
money on their bills.  
 
Improve health as homes become 
more  
 
Reduce fuel poverty  Set up the scheme. Identify the type 
of measures that can be 
implemented  Short term  
  
Potential 
carbon 
savings  
35,446.0  FY21/23  
75,0000   
Identification of suppliers that will 
help deliver the scheme  Short term   
Scheme approval by Executive  Short term   
Launch the scheme – identify  and 
contact the residents that can 
benefit from the scheme  Short term   
Continue advertising  and 
implementation  Medium – 
long term    
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 50  
 REF Action  Description  / Outcome  Co-Benefits/Unintended 
Consequences  Milestone  Timeline  Carbon 
Savings  tCO 2e Project 
Cost  RAG  
Potential  carbon savings 44,307.5 
tCO2e  
16.2  Gren Homes Grant  Support residents to reduce their 
energy usage and carbon emissions 
and increase the uptake of green 
energy technologies. This scheme 
will include energy efficiency 
measures.  
More residents will be able to 
improve the energy efficiency of 
their properties and switch from gas 
to electricity  By improving the energy efficiency 
of our homes will mean 
households can significantly 
reduce demand and save money 
on their bills.  
 
Reduce fuel poverty  Deliver Green Homes Grant LAD 1 Short term  
Carbon 
savings 
shared with 
ECO scheme  Nil  
Green Homes Grant LAD 2  Short term  
Continue application for upcoming 
grants  Medium 
term  
16.3  Support residents and 
local businesses to 
reduce their energy 
usage and carbon 
emissions by retrofitting 
their properties - Green 
Bank Scheme  The Green Bank Scheme will provide 
loans to assist householders in their 
net zero carbon ambitions. This will 
include energy efficiency measures on 
the fabric of the building and replacing 
appliances with low carbon versions. 
Householders will pay this bac k against 
a loan re -payment (plus interest) over 
a period of time (7, 10 and 15 years).  More residents will be able to 
improve the energy efficiency of 
their properties and switch from gas 
to electricity.  
 
By improving the energy efficiency of 
our homes wi ll mean households can 
significantly reduce demand and 
save money on their bills.  
 Identify partners and set up the 
scheme  Medium 
term  Carbon 
savings 
shared with 
ECO scheme 
and GHG  TBC  
16.4 Smart City Cluster pilot 
project  The project focus on energy savings 
from ‘small’ devices using a ‘smart’ 
plug.  
This project will help to inform on 
technologies that will help reduce 
energy consumption   Trial to other office locations where 
the impacts across numerous devices 
can be tested and monitored.  They 
are looking for a minimum energy 
saving of 5% along with associated 
cost savings.  Looks very promising.  Medium – 
long term  Nil Nil  
16.5 Street lighting project  A major street lighting LED Upgrade 
Scheme took place over the last few 
years. This has significantly reduced 
energy consumption and equipped the 
streetlights  with remote 
control/monitoring.  
The council will further explore 
projects that have the potentia l to 
create further carbon savings.  
  Part-night lighting:  There are approx. 
2,000 unit operating “part -night” in 
Wokingham, where they switch off 
between 0:30 and 5:30.  
The council will explore how this 
scheme could be extended to other 
roads  Medium – 
long term  Carbon 
savings will be 
identified 
through the 
feasibility 
assessments  TBC  
Dimming: All of  the new LED lights are 
dimmable and in the majority of 
locations we currently dim them to 
80% power at 10pm and 60% power Medium – 
long term  TBC  
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 51  
 REF Action  Description  / Outcome  Co-Benefits/Unintended 
Consequences  Milestone  Timeline  Carbon 
Savings  tCO 2e Project 
Cost  RAG  
Carbon savings will be identified 
through the feasibility  assessments  at midnight. The council will explore 
the possibility to further fine -tune 
these dimming levels.  
 
   
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 52  
 Carbon S equestration  
 
Carbon savings : None yet to report . 
 
The actions identified in our plan seek to not only address climate change 
but also to improve our local air quality, protect and enhance important 
habitats and safeguard our local biodiversity. The council has committed 
to plant 250,000  trees  by 2025 .  
 
Over the last year we have focus ed on doing the groundwork that will 
ensure the long -term sustainability of this project  as it is essential to 
consider the maintenance of the trees in the long -term, as well as making 
sure we choose the right tree for the ri ght location, promote native tree 
planting and well targeted woodland creation, as well as encouraging 
retention of trees.  
 
The delivery of tree planting will be supported by a Tree Strategy, this will 
help meet statutory biodiversity obligations, while m aximising the wide 
range of benefits that trees and woods can deliver for health, amenity, 
climate change and water management.  
 
The council plans also include projects to manag e grassland, rewild  land , 
and protect and enhanc e wetland habitats.  
 
Our Key Ac hievements  
• Created a partnership with the Woodland Trust to support the delivery 
of our tree planting and secure £300,000 through the Emergency Tree 
Fund.  
Our Partners  
The delivery of tree planting and other carbon sequestration projects 
listed in our action plan will not be possible without the support and 
collaboration of the towns and parish council’s, residents, local businesses, 
suppliers, the national grid, public energy suppliers.  
 
  Wokingha m Borough Council ’s partnership with the Woodland Trust will 
ensure we receive the advice and support needed to ensure that we will 
be able to maximise the wide range of benefits that trees and woods can 
deliver . 
 
Behaviour change remains important through  the solutions to the climate  
and ecological emergencies  which are recognised as intertwined . 
Residents have appreciated their green spaces across the borough 
throughout the pandemic more than ever before and stewardship over 
those spaces is widely accepted as vital.  
 
Consumption Emissions  
There are consumption emissions associated with every purchase of a 
good or service  including of trees . However, by planting native trees, these 
emissions will be as low as possible.  These are out of scope CO 2 emissions . 
 
Future Opportunities  
The Climate and Ecological Emergency (CEE) Bill was introduc ed in 
parliament on Wednesday 2nd September 2020.  This Bill will accelerate 
change and provide positive outcomes for the local authority climate 
emergency agenda . Further resources and funds are to be allocated if the 
Bill is passed into law . 
 
Point 9 of the Government’s Ten Point Plan for a Green Industrial 
Revolution focuses on protecting our natural environment where the 
government committed to protect 30% of UK land by 2030 by designating 
new national parks and AONBs, initiate recovery proje cts as well as plant 
30,000 hectares of trees and rewild the countryside to the measure of 
30,000 football pitches.  
 
Further upcoming national policy includes the England Tree Strategy and 
the Nature Strategy.   SDG S 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 53  
  
REF Action  Description  / Outcome  Co-benefits / Unintended 
consequences  Milestone  Timeline  Carbon 
Savings  
tCO 2e Estimated 
Project Cost  RAG  
T17 Target 1 7. Plant 250,000 trees throughout the Borough by 2025 saving 3.5 ktCO 2e per annum      3,500  No 
allocated   
17.1 Create a new forest that 
will increase the 
number of trees in the 
Borough to improve 
carbon capture and 
biodiversity net gain  Large -scale (greater t han 5ha) 
woodland planting on council owned 
land on high carbon capture 
potential sites (e.g. arable land, 
improved grassland).  
Carbon sequestration potential of 
7.83 tonnes of CO 2e equivalent per 
hectare in first year of planting, 13.7 
tonnes thereafter.   
 
Current woodland cover estimated at 
2576 ha of Wokingham Borough 
(14.3%).  Planting 115 ha more 
woodland (and associated green  
infrastructure) would get the 
Borough woodland land cover close 
to 15%.  Improve our local air quality  
 
Protect and enhance important 
habitats  
 
Safeguard local biodiversity  
 
Improve w ater management  
 
Help to combat c limate change  
 
Provide space for leisure and 
recreation  Initial feasibility study, project plan and 
business case development  
Medium 
term    
  
  
  
  
 3,500 
  
  
  
  Tree stock, 
planting, 
and 
maintenanc
e during 
establishme
nt 
estimated at  
£1,500,000  
 
Planning, 
consultation
, public co -
ordin ation, 
and 
handover 
estimated  
at £220,000   
Identify council owned land that is 
suitable for a major tree planting 
scheme   
Review our estate portfolio for 
agricultural land / improved grassland, 
which has the potential to be converted 
to woodland.   
Engage forestry specialist contractor to 
advice on feasibility, constraints, and 
process. Prepare consultant brief   
Preparing plans and consulting public   
EIA Screening / Planning   
Grant and other scheme applications   
Ordering and planting trees (with 
protection)   
Installation of other site infrastructure   
Produce forest management plan   
Handover to site manager (phased) - 
Ongoing management   
17.2 Deliver small -scale 
woodland planting on 
council estate in existing 
parks and opens spaces 
sites.  Identify potential programme to 
invest in small -scale woodland 
planting on council estate in existing 
parks and opens spaces sites.  
This small -scale planting can be 
deployed with shorter time scales 
than larger afforestation schemes.   
 
Estimate 5 to 10 ha of land available 
(circa 8,000 to 16,000 trees if planted 
as woodland) . 
  
New c ommunity orchards for local 
food production  
 
Improve our local air quality  
 
Safeguard local biodiversity  
 
Improve w ater management  
 
Help to combat c limate change  
 Assessment to council estate portfolio 
to identify areas in existing public open 
space that has potential to be converted 
to woodland.  
Medium 
term  7,938  Tree stock, 
planting, 
and 
maintenanc
e during 
estab lishme
nt 
estimated at 
£135,000  
 
Planning, 
consultation 
Carried out an internal review of 
constraints, costing, and scheduling.  
Preferably looking to target small low 
risk areas   
Preparing plans   
Implement public consultation on 
identified sites   
Grant and other scheme applications    
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 54  
  
REF Action  Description  / Outcome  Co-benefits / Unintended 
consequences  Milestone  Timeline  Carbon 
Savings  
tCO 2e Estimated 
Project Cost  RAG  
Potential for the sites to be planted 
as Community Orchards for local 
food production and BAP targets.   
Converting from improved grassland 
to traditional orchard with 
wildflower rich ground flora has the 
potential to still sequester circa 6 
tonnes of CO 2e equivalent a year.  Provide space for leisure , 
recreation  and education  
  Ordering and planting trees (with 
protection)  , public co -
ordin ation, 
and 
handover 
estimated  
at £35,000   
Ongoing management  - Produce/review 
woodland management plan   
Promote tree planting campaigns to 
engage with residents, schools and local 
businesses (e.g. National Tree Week on 
28th November)   
17.3 Support woodland and 
hedgerow creation on 
private sites.  Set up a grant scheme for local 
private landowners to apply for 
funding to create new woodland and 
hedge roads on privately owned 
sites.  
 
Recommend running scheme as 
yearly rounds with a ceiling of 16,000 
whip trees (equivalent to 10ha 
broadleaf woodland)  per year.  
 
If run in 2022/23, 2023/24, and 
2024/25 with complete take up it has 
a potential to deliver 48,000 trees.   Produce Wokingham Borough Tree 
strategy to establish guidance for the 
delivery of the scheme  Short 
term  
9,531  Tree stock, 
delivery, and 
planting 
(with 
partners) 
estimated at  
£90,000  
 
Scheme 
creation, 
promotion 
and 
community 
engagement  
estimated  at 
£45,000   
Set up the scheme. Define the 
thresholds, suitability assessment and  
grants or plants  Short 
term   
Call for sites - Scheme promotion and 
engagement with local landowners  
Selection for piloting with a beacon site  Short 
term   
Tranche 1 - Planting plan design and 
approval, establishing contract 
negotiation, payment mechanism, 
compliance checking and other grant 
and carbon trading scheme support  Medium 
term   
Review of tranche 1 take -up and 
feasibility assessment for tranches 2 & 3 Medium 
term   
17.4 Make Wokingham a 
Garden Forest by 
promoting and 
encouraging residents 
to plant new trees  Establish general process and 
guidance that could allow residents 
and local businesses who want to 
plant and maintain ed their own trees 
either with our permission on our 
land, or to help them have a 
successful tree on their own land.  
A community of garden tree owners - 
scheme will be required to engage 
the community and ensure the 
legacy of the tree planting, securing 
that trees will be looked after.   Produce Wokingham Borough Tree 
strategy to establish guidance for the 
delivery of the scheme  Short 
term  
 
4,950  Tree stock 
and deli very 
(with 
partners) 
estimated at  
£130,000  
Scheme 
creation, 
promotion, 
and 
community 
engagement  
Design the scheme; include 
considerations on types of trees, 
maturity.  
Provide the mechanism to select the 
right tree for the right place.  
Establish the delivery mechanism  Short 
term   
Launch the scheme and engage with 
residents and local businesses. Provide 
guidelines on the types of trees to be Medium 
term    
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 55  
  
REF Action  Description  / Outcome  Co-benefits / Unintended 
consequences  Milestone  Timeline  Carbon 
Savings  
tCO 2e Estimated 
Project Cost  RAG  
 
These schem es will seek to deliver  
6,000 trees  
 
Estimate that a scheme with 
approximate 10% of householder 
take up rate has the potential to 
deliver 6,000 to 7,000 trees planted.  
Recommend that that the scheme 
should be budgeted to have a 10,000 
tree ceiling.  planted, the pathway  for application of 
new trees and the benefits from the tree 
(carbon savings, biodiversity gain, etc.).  estimated at  
£60,000  
Implementation of the scheme. System 
to take and register the orders - place 
tree orders and delivery.  
Record keeping.  Medium 
term   
Legacy - is there ongoing support 
offered.   
Long -term recording of benefits  
Opt-out (local offsetting)  Medium 
term   
Annual review and monitoring of the 
scheme  Medium 
term   
Assume request a tree scheme will run 
for 1 year only but potential to turn into 
an annual campaign depending on 
uptake in 2023 Medium 
term   
T18 Target 18. Carbon sequestration by design - improving carbon sequestration rates in future land management decisions, Approximately 0. 062 
ktCO 2e savings   660   
18.1 Develop the 
Wokingham Borough 
Tree Strategy to support 
long-term creation and 
retention of woodland 
and trees  Develop ing a tree strategy for the 
Borough which will help define:  
Appropriate species (and adaptation 
to climate change);  
Good management practice;  
Facilitating ongoing recruitment to 
veteran tree population;  
Appropriate places for woodland 
creation;  and access.  
 
Improving the retention rate of trees 
- The longer trees are standing the 
longer carbon is locked up.  
 
Encouraging planting of woodland on 
private land.   Identification of requirements for Tree 
Strategy   Short 
term  Neutral   Nil  
Development of Fea sibility study brief 
(including  land appropriation and/or 
acquisition)  
Develop and builds upon existing 
studies  
Identify land available and type of 
habitat  
Verify likely carbon sequestration  
Confirm more detailed cost estimates  
Allows milestone point for decision to 
continue with full funding  Short 
term      
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 56  
  
REF Action  Description  / Outcome  Co-benefits / Unintended 
consequences  Milestone  Timeline  Carbon 
Savings  
tCO 2e Estimated 
Project Cost  RAG  
18.2 Include in the Local Plan 
Update policy for 
carbon sequestration 
potential.  
Subject to inspection, 
the local plan update  
will include:  
Green Infrastructure 
Policy  
Tree Policy  
Flood Policy  
Biodiversity Policy  
Design Policy  Policies written to avoid loss of 
established habitat will help retain 
carbon stores.  
 
Policies written to see k 
multifunctional design of green and 
blue infrastructure will build in 
carbon sinks to new development.  
 
Policies written to retain and 
enhance biodiversity (particularly 
botanic diversity) will aid carbon 
sequestration in soils.  
 
Design guide to green an d blue 
infrastructure will encourage 
inclusion of low intensity 
(maintenance) habitat for carbon 
sequestration.  
 
Assuming roughly 70ha of green 
infrastructure created in the LPU 
cycle.  A nudge of 10% cover from 
high intensity maintenance grassland 
to low intensity species rich, brought 
about by good design guiding, could 
sequestrate a further 42 tonnes of 
carbon dioxide equivalent per year.  Avoid / reduce the loss of 
established habitat . 
 
Retain and enhance biodiversity  Require a review of ability to enhance 
carbon sequestration rates for all new 
policies and design guides to be 
published alongside.  
 
Independent assessment - design 
policy approach to maximise carbon 
sequestration  Medium 
term  42  £10,000  
Approx.   
18.3 Develop the Local 
Nature Recovery 
Strategy to provide 
complementary funding 
source to aid land use 
change (LULUCF being a 
carbon sink)  Developing a Local Nature Rec overy 
Strategy that covers the B orough will 
provide a 5% uplift on the number of 
biodiversit y net gain units that can 
be generated in areas identified as 
part of a local nature recovery 
network. The ability of soil to 
sequestrate carbon correlates 
positively with biodiversity.  Biodiversity net gain unit capacity 
raises the value of land  
 
Avoid / reduce the loss of 
established habitat . 
 
Retain and enhance biodiversity  Develop the Local Nature Recovery 
Strategy through the Berkshire Local 
Nature Partnership  
 
Initial analysis of 30% target area - 
mapping exercise  
 
Consultation exercise with 
stakeholders  Medium 
term  Neutral  Initial 
£40000 
further 
funding will 
be required    
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 57  
  
REF Action  Description  / Outcome  Co-benefits / Unintended 
consequences  Milestone  Timeline  Carbon 
Savings  
tCO 2e Estimated 
Project Cost  RAG  
 
Additional biodiversity net gain unit 
capacity raises the value of la nd (for 
making improvements for 
biodiversity) , and will leverage 
funding for habitat improvement 
that will lead to soil restora tion and 
carbon sequestration.  
 
On assumption that average of 2.5 
units per ha (not including current 
woodland area) can be generated at  
£15,000 per unit, the 5% uplift on a 
LNRS (over and above the national 
strategy area) would generate value 
on the biodiversity potential of 
£5,276,250   
Revising the L ocal Nature Cover 
Strategy and taking it through the local 
authority adoption process  
18.4 Develop a Natural Flood 
Management 
partnership and scheme  The creation of wetland habitat as 
part of a programme of restoration 
of natural flood management 
processes has potential to 
sequestrate carbon and reduce soil 
degradation.  
 
The partnership work an d scheme 
would place through agreements 
with Environment Agency, water 
companies, and other Loddon 
Catchment Partnership partners.  
 
Natural flood management measures 
that prevent degradation might 
prevent 0.25 tonnes of carbon per 
hectare being released in to the 
atmosphere.  
 
 Reduce risk of floods and improve 
water management    
Initial mapping exercise to identify 
locations that will provide wetland 
habitat and could be forward into the 
scheme  
 
Consultation exercise with 
stakeholders  
 
Revising the Strategy and taking it 
through the local authority adoption 
process  Long term  0.25  TBC    
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 58  
  
REF Action  Description  / Outcome  Co-benefits / Unintended 
consequences  Milestone  Timeline  Carbon 
Savings  
tCO 2e Estimated 
Project Cost  RAG  
  
T19 Target 19. Transition to low intensity (high carbon sequestration) land management. This will sequestrate approximately 0.024k tCO 2e per 
annum   642     
19.1 Work to transition 
Grassland Management 
to less frequent cutting 
scheme allowing 
wildflowers to bloom 
and set seed  Considerations to the BLUE heart 
campaign style management of 
grassland moving away from 
improved grassland habitat under an 
intensive cut cycle and allowing 
rewilding of highway verge and other 
areas increasing  
 
Currently approximately 125ha of 
Environmental Localities greenspace 
is improved or semi -improved 
grassla nd.   
 
Converting 1/3 of the approx. 125ha 
of improved grassland within 
Environmental Localities portfolio to 
species rich grassland on a once a 
year cut could sequester an 
additional 242 tCO 2e per year (33% 
of 125 x 5.87, for conversion rate of 
improved to pollen and nectar mix 
from NERR043).  
Converting rural highways verge to 
cut and collect, estimate of 4 tonnes 
per hectare would equate to 400 
tonnes CO 2e per year for 100% 
conversion.  
 5% pilot is estimated to have the 
potential to sequestrate 20 tonnes of 
CO 2e per year.  Less maintenance than traditional 
mowing schedules can save money  
 
Significantly increasing local 
wildlife density and diversity  
 
Support learning for schools’  
children and the wider community 
and provide opportunities to get 
involved in environmental projects  Pilot the principle of cut and collect to 
highways verge to improve biodiversity 
and soil restoration in selected areas.  
Run a 5% conversation pilot for 
highways verge and rural highways 
verge  
 
Target of 12.5ha of wildflower 
grassland creation across 
Environmental Localities sites. 
Converting 10% of this to pollen and 
nectar mix would sequestrate 
approximately 74 tonnes of CO2 
equivalent per year.  Medium 
term  642 Estimated at 
£130,000    
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 59  
  
REF Action  Description  / Outcome  Co-benefits / Unintended 
consequences  Milestone  Timeline  Carbon 
Savings  
tCO 2e Estimated 
Project Cost  RAG  
19.2 Work to transition 
Grassland Management 
to support the Restoring 
Biological Processes  Natural greenspace grassland will 
perform better at carbon 
sequestration where:  
a) soil compaction from machinery is 
kept to a minimum, and  
b) structural diversity is encouraged 
by 'conservation' grazing (instead of 
uniform cutting).  
With the additional n atural 
greenspaces being taken on 
alongside development the scale to 
justify an internally owned and 
managed conservation -grazing herd 
may be reached.  
 
 A go al of 642 tCO2 per year (0.64 
ktCO 2e) would be targeted to be met 
in the period 2025 to 2030  Less maintenance than traditional 
mowing schedules can save money  
 
Significantly increasing local 
wildlife density and diversity  A feasibility study for applying a Legacy 
Gracing approach will set out the steps 
towards reducing our reliance on 
machine cutt ing and restoring soils.  Medium 
term  642     
19.3 Implement Citizen 
Science Engagement for 
Hedgerow Restoration  There is approximately 1534 km of 
(mapped) hedgerow in Wokingham 
Borough.  Of this, approximately 
963km (63%) is within the 
countryside (as defined by 
settlement hierarchy).  Of this, 
approximately 397km (26%) are 
associated with the adopted 
highway.  
Hedgerows are a good target for 
restoration work to increase the 
number of standing mature trees 
storing carbon.  At a 50m spacin g 
400km of hedgerow would be 
equate to 8,000 open growing trees . 
 
Potential to increase an additional 
3,200 tCO 2e captured over the next 
70 years.   Improve our local air quality  
 
Safeguard local biodiversity  
 
Improve w ater management  
 
Help to combat c limate change   TVERC product development to take 
PTES hedgerow survey data and project 
in an interpreted way to inform 
hedgerow management for land 
managers.  
 
Tool can be used by Trees & Landscape 
officers for enforcement of the 
Hedgerow Regulations.  
 
To inform a planting and restoration 
plan (as a part of the tree strategy), a 
citizen science condition assessment 
programme would greatly enhance the 
targeted planting of trees in suitable 
locations.  Medium 
term  3,200  £15,000    
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 60  
  
REF Action  Description  / Outcome  Co-benefits / Unintended 
consequences  Milestone  Timeline  Carbon 
Savings  
tCO 2e Estimated 
Project Cost  RAG  
T20 Target 20. Implement a programme of carbon sequestration opportunities     Neutral   Nil   
20.1 Engage the community 
with Community 
Garden Schemes  Allow new allotment site due to be 
open ed in 2020 as part of the South 
Wokingham Strategic Development 
Location ( SDL) 
 
Carbon savings for these schemes 
are detrimental, however engaging 
residents with allotments and 
community garden schemes 
contributes to behavioural change  Promote production of fresh, local, 
seasonal produce  
 
The social contact offered by 
gardening in an allotment 
environment helps to combat the 
lack of social capital embodied by 
loneliness  
 
Gardening can prevent and 
alleviate mental ill -health  and offer 
physical benefits  
 
 
Improve local air quality  Work with UoR in assessing the ‘Life 
Cycle Sustainability Analysis (LCSA) of 
Urban Food Production – the Case of 
Allotment Gardens and identify future 
opportunities for engagement  Short 
term  Neutral  Nil  
20.2 Enable the assessment 
and test of carbon 
sequestration new 
technologies  Enable the safe testing and 
assessment of new initiatives for 
carbon sequestration  
 
There is potential for carbon savings 
of individual projects which will be 
assessed on once projects have been 
identified   Road spray initiative investigated as 
part of options appraisal for air quality 
initiatives.  
It was recommended that this initiative  
was not explore further as the benefits 
to AQ and carbon savings are minimal  Short 
term  Neutral  TBC  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 61  
 Engaging Schools and Young People
Carbon savings: 153.4 tCO 2e  
 
Due to  lockdown restrictions over the last year  there has been limited 
engagement with schools. The council has worked to build up contacts 
with school and gain more experience of delivering these targets virtually 
which will be implemented in the updated action plan below.  
 
Our Key Achievements  
• A You th Climate Conference was delivered online in the second week 
of October . The video series received a total of 5,600+ views across all 
social media platforms.  
• A total of 9 retrofit projects were undertaken at schools including LED 
lighting and variable hea t pumps. A further 10 projects approved for 
similar retrofit projects including LED lighting, heating replacement 
and loft insulation.  Carbon saved from retrofitting projects are 
accounted for under target 15.1 for ‘Retrofitting Domestic and 
Commercial Ass ets’.   
• 6 schools are taking part in an air quality project and have diffusion 
tubes at their schools to monitor levels of pollutants. As part of this 
programme , a series of  educational events, learning aids, 
competitions and lesson plans are being rolled o ut to the borough’s 
primary schools  more widely.   
 
Our Partners  
Wokingham Borough Council is keen to engage with as many schools and 
young people in the borough as possible in order to tackle the climate 
emergency as the council recognises the next generation are the driving 
force being this international movement. Sch ools, teachers and young 
people themselves will be the council’s key partners for delivery of the 
actions set out below.  
 
 
  Behaviour change is a key aim of this section of the climate emergency 
action plan and should raise awareness and allow both childr en, young 
people to continue to drive this agenda. Making the voices of young 
people heard should also encourage intergenerational learning meaning 
sustainable behaviour change in encouraged from their parents and 
families.  
 
Consumption Emissions  
The engag ement targets below are to reduce overall carbon footprints of 
our residents which includes all 3 scopes of emissions. The carbon savings 
associated with the targets below have been reduced from last year’s 
estimates by 79% in line with the consumption -based UK carbon footprint 
which informs us that only 21% of all greenhouse gas emissions are from 
direct sources and therefore within our scope of influence.  
 
We have made the decision to lower these predicted savings also to ensure 
that there is less risk of double counting of carbon savings whilst realising 
that possible behaviour change as a result of engagement means and 
accelerated the shift to more sustain able behaviours and therefore drives 
carbon emissions down further by 2030.  
 
Future Opportunities  
There are various environmentally focused initiatives, award schemes and 
accreditation s which schools can work towards and many schools in the 
borough have achieved some of these awards. The council’s aim i s to make 
it as simple as possible to identify which scheme will work for them and 
what their pupils want to achieve and support schools in their journey to 
becoming more sustainable or even net zero carbon and how this can tie 
in with the curriculum at all levels.  
  SDG S 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 62  
 REF Action  Description/ Outcome s Co-Benefits/Unintended 
consequences  Milestone /Progress  Time Scale  Annual 
Carbon 
Savings  tCO 2e Project Cost  RAG  
T21 Target 2 1. Encourage and support school children in the Borough to take an active role in reducing carbon emissions        
21.1 Deliver annual climate 
emergency assemblies 
at local schools  Introduce discussions about Climate 
Emergency amongst children and 
young adults  via an annual climate 
emergency assembly for all 
secondary school students.  
 
98.5 tCO 2e savings  Restricted access and 
communications with schools due 
to covid -19 restrictions in place.  
 
Engagement from pupils should 
also reduce out of scope emissions 
in their carbon footprints, such as 
from food choices.  Plan and deliver climate 
emergency assemblies with all 
secondary schools . 
 
Climate Emergency Assemblies 
were delivered to all year groups 
in 3 Secondary Schools in the 
borough to a tota l of 
approximately 3,357 pupils before 
lockdown restrictions came into 
place.  37.4 tCO2e savings  achieved 
this year.  Short term 
and ongoing   
 
 98.5 
 
   Nil  
21.2 Create climate 
committees in schools  Provide  an opportunity for students, 
teachers, parents and the local 
community to work together to  
support the delivery of climate 
related projects.  
 
Increase engagement with climate 
emergency issues and ownership of 
actions to reduce carbon dioxide 
emissions.  
 
One per school  start ing with 
secondary schools initially.  
 
11 tCO 2e savings per school per 
annum  Restricted access and 
communications with schools due 
to covid -19 restrictions in place.  
 
Engagement from pupils should 
also reduce out of scope emissions 
in their carbon footprints, such as 
from food choices.  Produce information pack for how 
to set up a school council.  Provide 
contacts within Wokingham 
Borough Council to help/attend 
when needed . 
Wokingham Borough Council is 
soon to pilot Youth Voice (youth 
council) which will contain a 
regular climate emergency item . Medium term  
11  Nil  
Aim t o set first committees up 
with particularly engaged schools 
in 2021, or 2022 depending on the 
schools capacity post covid -19. 
Headteachers summit to be held 
in July 2021. This summit aims to 
share of schools to schools on how 
schools can respond to the cli mate 
emergency, including setting up 
eco-committees for pupils.  Short t erm 
and ongoing  Nil  
21.3 Deliver the Youth 
Climate Conference  Increased awareness , engagement  
and understanding o f climate 
emergency issues am ongst children 
and young adults attending . Youth 
Climate Conference is aimed at  Restricted access and 
communications with schools due 
to covid -19 restrictions in place 
meant the event w as held online A Youth Climate Conference was 
delivered online in October 2020 
comprising of 9 informative videos 
from charity partners and 
academic researchers. The video Short term 
and annual  5.3  2,000     
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 63  
 REF Action  Description/ Outcome s Co-Benefits/Unintended 
consequences  Milestone /Progress  Time Scale  Annual 
Carbon 
Savings  tCO 2e Project Cost  RAG  
sixth form (16+) students from 
across the Borough.  
 
5.3 tCO 2e savings  only with less engagement than 
planned.  
 
Engagement from pupils should 
also reduce out of scope emissions 
in their carbon footprints, such as 
from food choices.  series received a total of 5,600+ 
views across all social media 
platforms.  
 
Aim to repeat this even t virtually 
one a platform which allows for 
improved engagement.  
21.4 Encourage schools to 
include climate 
emergency issues in 
lesson time  Commitment from schools to 
include climate change in lesson 
time, for all children in at least one 
subject i.e. science, geography, 
philosophy, PSHE.  
 
Increased knowledge amongst 
children and young adults on 
climate emergency issues  
 
37 tCO 2e savings   Will be able to raise awareness 
around the connectedness of the 
climate emergency into all 
affected topics such as 
biodiversity.  
 
Engagement from pupils should 
also reduce out of scope emissions 
in their carbon footprints, such as 
from food choices.  Create a series of climate 
emergency lesson plans for Key 
Stages 1 -3 initially.  
An initial climate emergency 
lesson plan has been drafted for 
testing in secondary schools . 
Medium term    
37 
  Nil   
Create a pledge  with criteria for all 
schools to sign; to be presented at 
the Secondary Federation.  
Create campaign to engage across 
schools and the public to lobby for 
commitment from all schools. Use 
different communication channels 
(e.g. local news, social media, etc.)   
Gain commitment from all schools 
and follow up to see how they are 
fulfilling the promise, with positive 
press coverage.   
21.5 Encourage schools to 
adopt  sustainable  
property and 
operational 
management practices 
that reduce carbon 
emissions and support 
the environment  Develop a sustained campaign to 
encourage  schools to focus on  
environmental issues to promote 
behavioural change.  
 
Better informed children and school 
staff on sustainability practices.  Restricted visitor access in schools 
due to covid -19 restrictions in 
place meant carrying out the 
retrofitting works have been 
delayed in some cases.  
 
Learning opportunity around how 
energy use impacts our carbon 
footprin ts. 
 Work with schools to encourage 
retrofitting and raise awareness 
about energy ratings, usage and 
consumption.  Short term  See Target 
15.1  See Target 
15.1   
Work with schools to identify the 
school’s carbon footprint including 
consumption emissions where 
possible, such as from food 
choices.  
The council has assisted 2 schools 
with this in the last year.  Short term  Neutral  Nil  
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 64  
 REF Action  Description/ Outcome s Co-Benefits/Unintended 
consequences  Milestone /Progress  Time Scale  Annual 
Carbon 
Savings  tCO 2e Project Cost  RAG  
21.6 Encourage Wokingham 
Borough schools to 
become net zero carbon 
and embrace 
sustainability   Create positive partnerships with 
schools to make the best use of 
already existing schemes such as 
the Eco Schools Scheme, UN 
Climate Accreditation for school 
staff,  etc. 
 
All schools to achieve Eco Schools 
programme by December 2025 . Behaviour change promoted in 
specific areas as demanded by the 
accreditation aimed for.  Get all schools to sign up to 
bronze level of eco schools by 
December 2021  
Short term  TBC Nil   
Set up an incentive for all local 
schools to become green flag level 
by December 2025   
Support schools to assess their 
carbon emissions and sustainability 
status.   
 
Each school to have a sustainability 
and carbon emissions baseline to 
help schools to take better 
informed actions in the journey to 
become net -zero carbon . Learning opportunity  to tie in the 
various services the council can 
provide  into the climate 
emergency.  Produce and online resource on 
the Council’s offering to schools.  Short term  
  
Neutral     Cost of 
software   
Assessment of sustainability 
initiatives implemented at schools 
to identify what they already do 
and how we can support them to 
become net -zero carbon.  Short term  Nil  
Energy performance assessment 
for each school . 
The energy team have undertaken 
19 site surveys which have 
included an energy audit  to see 
whether any other energy 
efficiency projects could be 
undertaken  (as of 25th May 2021 ). Short term 
and ongoing  See Target 
15.1  See Target 
15.1   
Learn  from best practices amongst 
local schools.  
Create an a ctive network of support 
within and among schools . Comradery amongst a local 
network of schools, students and 
teachers to share lessons learned 
through both failure and success 
and accelerate the path to carbon 
neutral . Draw up a step-by-step toolkit for 
schools to exemplify  best practice 
in the borough , including financial 
cost.  
Short term  Neutral     
Potentially 
cost of 
software  
   
Create our own 
federation/platform for 
sustainability within schools with 
sustainability leads  at school s. 
Look into ways where we can use 
internal  school  communications 
systems to nudge users .   
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 65  
 REF Action  Description/ Outcome s Co-Benefits/Unintended 
consequences  Milestone /Progress  Time Scale  Annual 
Carbon 
Savings  tCO 2e Project Cost  RAG  
21.7 Support schools to 
implement carbon 
sequestration projects  Connect  schools  to voluntary sector 
and the community  in projects  such 
as planting in care homes, working 
with local allotments and farms . 
 
Increased engagement with carbon 
sequestration projects among 
children and young adults . Focus on wildlife, biodiversity  and 
connection to where food comes 
from  as co -benefits to absorbing 
carbon we produce from the 
atmosphere  via planting . Planting trees and plants to create 
a small -scale young forest in 
school grounds or council owned 
land.  
Promote tree planting campaigns 
in schools grounds as part of 
education in climate change 
issues . 
Have engaged with schools to 
promote the free tree packs via 
the Woodland Trust and offering 
planting advice.  
Aim for 10 % of schools in the 
borough to successfully plant on 
their grounds.  Medium term  1.26 
 (0.18 per 
school )  Nil/Grant 
funding   
 Nil/Grant 
funding   
Make more allotment plots 
available to people on council 
owned ground to encourage 
young people to grow their own 
food.  Drives down 
food miles  
(out of scope)   Nil/Grant 
funding   
21.8 Waste reduction   
Run competition between schools 
to promote recyclin g, reduce waste  
and i ncrease children ’s awareness 
about the impact of waste  and 
reduce recycling contamination .  
   
 
 
 
 
Covid -19 has meant that more 
disposable items are being used 
and therefore general waste has 
seen an increase in the last year 
from schools.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Set up the competition guidelines 
and trial competition in a specific 
school . Short term  See target 
27.1   Nil   
Schools connected to  Food Waste 
Hero volunteers and local 
businesses, to share surplus food 
(and other goods ) rather than 
produce waste to i ncrease 
children ’s awareness about the 
value of food and goods and r educe 
waste.  Investigate Freecycle for food 
sche mes, to reduce food from 
schools go to waste and gets used, 
either for food banks or homeless 
shelters  Short term  More 
information is 
required.   
605.59  
KgCO2e is 
emitted per 
tonne of food 
waste going 
to landfill.  TBC    
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 66  
 REF Action  Description/ Outcome s Co-Benefits/Unintended 
consequences  Milestone /Progress  Time Scale  Annual 
Carbon 
Savings  tCO 2e Project Cost  RAG  
T22 Target 22. Celebrate schools achievements in climate emergency initiatives and inspire the future generations         
22.1 Launch sustainability 
awards for schools  Create an awards scheme to 
recognise and celebrate the efforts 
and achievements of local schools 
and their engagement with the 
climate emergency agenda . 
 
Engage  children with climate 
emergency initiatives . Raise awareness  of achievements  
and inspire the wider borough to 
engage with the climate 
emergency agenda.  Establish the criteria for all schools 
to participate.  
Promote the school awards  Short term  Neutral  To be 
confirmed 
once the 
project is 
scoped and 
costed   
22.2 Nurture creativity and 
resourcefulness 
amongst children and 
young adults   
Create a culture of innovation and 
enterprise thinking on climate 
emergency solutions  
 
Help develop resourcefulness and 
creativity  that is connected to 
climate change .  
 
0.34 tCO 2 savings  Raise awareness of achievements 
and inspire the wider borough to 
engage with the climate 
emergency agenda.  Roll out the Dragons Den climate 
competition across all schools . 
 
The pilot was successfully  
completed at one secondary 
school before lockdown 
restrictions limited access to 
schools.   Short term  0.34 tCO 2 10,000   
22.3 Implement a 
behavioural change 
programme within 
schools that would 
support the adoption of 
new behaviours, 
particularly within 
sustainability and 
climate change  Initial pilot in three schools will 
result in engaging 200 children  who 
are encourage d and rewarded for  
taking daily sustainable actions.  
  Raise awareness of achievements 
and inspire the wider borough to 
engage with the climate 
emergency agenda.  Identify and propose schools tha t 
should be part of the pilot - 
Autumn to Winter .  
Short term  More 
information 
needed on 
which 
behaviours 
will be 
targeted etc.  39,590   
Set up focus groups with children 
to drive the platform design. 
Potential to use eco committees  
within schools.  
Write a Business Case that 
includes timelines, activities  and 
carbon savings to obtain funding 
for the scheme implementation.  
 
 
 
   
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 67  
 Waste and Recycling  
 
Carbon savings: 15,502.79 tCO 2 
 
Overall , this year ’s total waste increased to 71 ,664 tonnes, with the 
recycling rate at 49.7% as compared to 50.3% in 2019/20.  This difference 
is due to a number of reasons including covid clear -outs coinciding with 
the closure of recycling centres as well as wet paper material that could 
not be recycled . Despite this, recycling rates in the borough still reached 
35,634 tonnes of this total, meaning 15 ,502.79 tonnes of CO 2 savings and 
221.47kg CO 2e per household, a huge achievement.   
 
However, a s waste emissions are outside of the  borough’s  scope and not 
included in the initial figures, the y have not been included in the overall 
savings figures  but remain here to demonstrate the potential savings 
which can be achieved towards global emissions from these initiatives  and 
highlight the importance of such measures.  
 
This is thanks to the success ful implementation of a number of initiatives 
around the existing waste and recycling goals set out in the initial plan. 
These include new measures for improving the quality collected 
recyclables  and several campaigns to increase awareness .  
 
Our Key Achievements  
• A number of communications campaigns through social media to 
increase recycling levels of food waste during October and November.  
• Through collaboration with school catering contractor Caterlink, 
significant progress has been made to r emove cling film, plastic cups, 
straws and bottles from 34 local authority schools in the borough, with 
reusable plastic pots, containers and fully recyclable package materials 
being introduced.  
• An interim solution to tackle wet recycling problem was appro ved at 
the end of September, with new recycling bags delivered to residents.  
 
Our Partners  
For each target the council has engaged with partners to ensure these are 
incorporated into existing plans and maximising their potential for success.   Here the ma in partners for each have been the Town and Parish Councils,  
Veolia  (waste collection) , re3  (Waste disposal) . We are also working closely 
with our schools  and residents  and will look to collaborate further with our 
local businesses.  
 
Behaviour change is of great importance to firstly reduce the amount 
residents and businesses throw away and secondly to encourage to recycle 
more. There are a number of different ways to engage and communicate 
with residents to encourage this shift in beh aviour which the council is 
exploring. Over the last year one of Wokingham Borough Council ’s biggest 
communications campaigns has been to increase participation in the food 
waste recycling scheme.  
 
Consumption Emissions  
Per household these overall figures relate to an average of 0.514 tonnes 
of residual waste, while 0.509 tonnes are being reused/recycled. While it 
is impossible to calculate exactly which materials these will relate to, some 
of the more significant elements can be estimated to demonstrate th e 
separate consumption emissions being produced from the disposal of each 
material. Therefore, within this household figure, it is estimated that 
217.61kgco2e arises  from residual waste and 11.25kgco2e arises  from all 
the recyclables combined. A breakdown for these estimates with 
individual figures and all carbon savings can be found in the methodology 
section.  
 
Future Opportunities  
A variety of new government led policies have recently been announced 
which may improv e the future effectiveness and likelihoods of these 
actions, including, the environment bill, the white paper and the sixth 
carbon budget which includes section specifically regarding waste. 
Therefore, as each of these develops, they will influence the bel ow actions 
and scope of such. This is a live document, meaning as these developments 
are introduced , they will be incorporated and actions adapted, assessing 
throughout what opportunities are available to maximise the potential 
benefits, such as producing energy from waste.  
  SDGs  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 68  
 REF Action  Co-Benefits / Covid Lessons  Description / Outcome  Milestone /Progress  Time Scale  Annual 
Carbon 
Savings tCO 2e Project 
Cost  (£) RAG  
T23 Target 2 3. Eliminate loss of MDR recyclable material in the form of wet paper     5188.67     
23.1 Increase awareness 
amongst residents to 
keep paper and card 
dry Improved awareness about overall 
recycling quality and increased 
communication with residents.  
 
Residents more likely to participate 
as not handling soggy waste. Covid 
communication about keeping 
waste clean and dry in order to 
prevent covid transmission to 
workers etc., will also indirectly 
benefit.  
 
More home deliveries mean  more 
cardboard from pac kaging , so 
residents need to be extra vigilant 
to maintain quality. May need to 
increase sack size to allow for this.  
 Reaching a high level of 
awareness amongst residents 
about the implications of wet 
recyclables and impact on 
recycling rate through regul ar 
(weekly) campaigns to prevent 
loss of recyclable material.  
 
This will generate  5188.67  
 tco2e savings  Social media campaign to remind residents 
to continue keeping their paper & card dry  
 
Progress: Successfully ran the ‘Stamp out 
the damp’ campaign and similar 
communications, including sharing 
information with residents on how to use 
the new bags and keep waste dry.  
Short term    
5188.67  
 
Note: This is 
out of scope 
so not 
included in 
overall figures  
    
  
TBC  
   
Information displayed on the website  
 
Progress: Website fully updated and social 
media / e -newsletters used to communicate 
information also.   
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 69  
 REF Action  Co-Benefits / Covid Lessons  Description / Outcome  Milestone /Progress  Time Scale  Annual 
Carbon 
Savings tCO 2e Project 
Cost  (£) RAG  
23.2 Implement interim 
solution for keeping 
paper and cardboard 
dry Improved awareness about overall 
recycling quality and increased 
communication with residents.  
 
Residents more likely to participate 
as not handling soggy waste. Covid 
communication about keeping 
waste clean and dry in order to 
prevent covid transmission to 
workers etc., will also indirectly 
benefit.  
 
More home deliveries means more 
cardboard from packaging so 
residents need to be extra vigilant 
to maintain quality. May need to 
increase sack size to allow for this.  Provision of interim initiative to 
reside nts to protect paper & 
cardboard from wet weather 
during autumn & winter 
periods to prevent loss of 
recyclable material.  
  Agreement between the council, Veolia and 
members on the interim solution (Exec 
report).  
Formal agreement through executive 
approval . 
 
Arrangement and delivery of the interim 
solution to residents by Veolia.  
 
Communicate with residents about this 
initiative.  
 
Brief consumer services and social media on 
new initiative.  
 
Progress: Deductions from rejections 
dropped drastically in Q4 tha nks to 
implementation of reusable bags.  Short term  
   
  
  
  
 TBC 
  
   
T24 Target 2 4. Achieve 70% recycling target by 2030    9618.23     
24.1 Implement a new waste 
and recycling collection 
system with improved 
facilities  Improved system in general 
facilitating this across all materials. 
Includes permanent solution to 
keeping paper and cardboard dry.  
 
Due to closures under lockdown, 
importance of being selective with 
waste so as to not overload general 
waste when limited disposal is 
available.  Follow ing consultation, a full 
Waste Strategy will be devised 
and implemented which will 
focus on waste minimisation,  
ahigh recycling rate, improved 
quality of recycling and reduced 
collection / disposal cost s and 
reduced carbon emissions.  
 
Specific carbon savings cannot 
be attributed to the strategy as 
a document, but can be 
attributed to the actions that it 
sets out.  Prepare consultants briefing , Options 
appraisal in early 2021, Market research  and 
Decision making by end of 2021. 
Devise and  adopt the communications plan 
by 202 2 
Development of the Waste Strategy 
throughout 2021  
 
Progress: Research and proposals and 
underway for the new waste strategy  Medium 
term  Included in 
total  
 
Note: This is 
out of scope 
so not 
included in 
overall figures  
 TBC  
Communication with residents pre -delivery  
Delivery of new waste collection methods  by 
March 2026 (three month)  
Ongoing communication with residents post 
delivery   
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 70  
 REF Action  Co-Benefits / Covid Lessons  Description / Outcome  Milestone /Progress  Time Scale  Annual 
Carbon 
Savings tCO 2e Project 
Cost  (£) RAG  
Assess impact of the new initiative on the 
property stock  
24.2 Improve residents' 
engagement with waste 
and recycling initiatives 
via partner Green 
Redeem  Increased communication with 
residents.  
 
Due to closures under lockdown, 
importance of being selective with 
waste so as to not overload general 
waste when limited disposal is 
available.  
 
Increase in gardening and allotment 
interest may lead to greater garden 
waste recycling, food waste and 
compos ting opportunities.  
 
Closure of recycling centres 
combined with a surge in waste 
from lockdown clear -outs will have 
increased waste and decreased 
recycling rates. However, going 
forward people have started to give 
more to charity shops and find ways 
to re -use/sell unwanted items 
rather than disposing of them, while 
also being more selective of waste 
on the whole, so as to not overload 
general waste when limited disposal 
is available.  Weekly customer email to 
subscribers and monthly 
targeted campaigns to coi ncide 
with council's services and 
initiatives to increase the level 
of participation in recycling and 
improve the accuracy of 
recycling materials.  
Alongside greater awareness 
amongst residents about 
environmental issues.  
 
This will generate 6771.65  
 tco2e savings  Weekly email to prompt residents on 
presenting their waste / recycling.  
 
Waste reduction campaign by 
GreenRedeem to coincide with the delivery 
of blue bags.  
 
Climate Change Emergency campaigns - 
what residents can do at home to cut their 
carbon (li nk to garden waste collection/food 
waste reduction/recycling & increase in 
recycling).  
 
Progress: Ongoing – We have run a number 
of successful campaigns/communications in 
this area and continue to do so.  Short term  
   
  
  
6771.65  
 
Note: This is 
out of scope 
so not 
included in 
overall figures  
 
  
    
  
  
TBC  
  
   
Promote and prompt residents to renew 
Garden Waste  
 
Progress:  Residents reminded via email and 
in other communication to renew their 
service. 11% of annual recycling amount 
now coming from this service.  
Promote online bulky waste collection 
service  
24.3 Target low participation 
areas to increase food 
waste tonnage to Low participation areas likely low in 
all aspects so identification can 
allow for focus and communication Improve uptake in food waste 
recycling to increase food Identify low participation areas from Veolia 
crew report and send letters.  
 Short term    
1664.69  
    
TBC  
    
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 71  
 REF Action  Co-Benefits / Covid Lessons  Description / Outcome  Milestone /Progress  Time Scale  Annual 
Carbon 
Savings tCO 2e Project 
Cost  (£) RAG  
increase participation 
above 50%  on all recycling. Likely will lead to 
greater food security/reduced 
inequality due to more donations of 
excess. Also greater health as 
residents able to purchase cheaper 
veg and items in general under shop 
excess schemes.  
Panic buying will likely have 
increased food waste during spikes. 
More home deliveries, may have 
better data on the areas with 
highest consumptions or best/worst 
figures. Opportunity f or 
communication in delivery.  waste tonnage, hence reducing 
loss of recyclable material.  
 
This will generate 1664.69  
tco2e savings  Progress: All the data has now been 
gathered and will be incorporated into the 
overall waste strategy.  
 
Food waste collection anniversary thank you 
to residents for the fantastic results already 
achieved! Along with Easter recycling 
messages  (packaging/foil recycling tips/food 
waste etc.).  Note: This is 
out of scope 
so not 
included in 
overall figures  
   
Communicate importance of not panic 
buying – no need as supply chains 
unaffected.  
Assess alternative uses and communicate 
these (animal feed etc).  
 
Progress: New milestones  
24.4 Increase & improve 
facilities for glass 
recycling  
 
Partner – Sheltered 
accommodation 
providers  Supports wider glass usage in 
goods, meaning less plastic.  
 
Kerbside collections also means less 
travel for residents.  
 
Significant disruption from covid in 
assessing suitable sites.  Increase capture rate of glass 
from general waste through 
introduction of  
50 new specific recycling sites 
and kerbside collections at 
sheltered accomodation , 
making it more convenient for 
residents and reducing loss of 
recyclable material.  
 
This will generate 1142.03 
tco2e savings  Ident ify potential new specific and sheltered 
sites by communicating with parishes & 
town councils and other private businesses 
& partners such as FCC. Then install bottle 
banks once approved and communicate this 
with site management and residents.  
Providing ke rbside glass collection at 
sheltered accommodation.  
 
Progress: 5 sites identified with the help of 
local Cllr’s . These included:  
1. Sutton Business Park, 2. British Gardens, 
Winnersh , 3. Rushey Way, Earley , 4. Laurel 
Park, Earley , 5. Network Vineyard Church, 
Eastcourt Avenue . However, none 
materialised  due to landowner rejections.  Medium  
term    
 1142.03  
 
Note: This is 
out of scope 
so not 
included in 
overall figures  
   
TBC    
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 72  
 REF Action  Co-Benefits / Covid Lessons  Description / Outcome  Milestone /Progress  Time Scale  Annual 
Carbon 
Savings tCO 2e Project 
Cost  (£) RAG  
24.5 Proactive approach to 
partner with housing 
developers to deliver 
waste management 
facilities in new 
developments  Opportunity to induce better 
recycling habits amongst new 
residents.  
Home working means more 
domestic waste so this needs to be 
accounted for in planning.  
May lead to requests for upgrad es 
for existing homes.  
Designing this optimally from the 
start will save time and costs on 
collections.  
 Provide good waste and 
recycling facilities and 
communicate the system to 
new residents in new 
developments. Leading to 
greater recycling rates and 
quality.  
 
This will generate 39.86   
 tco2e savings  Proactively approach and revive working 
relationship with sales offices in new 
development  
Long term    
39.86   
  
Note: This is 
out of scope 
so not 
included in 
overall figures  
 
    
TBC  
  
   Work closely with developers to ensure 
efficient supply of waste management 
facilities to residents as they move in.  
 
Progress: Improved and futureproofed 
guidance for developers. In the process of 
obtaining new software for greater 
management of site specifica tions. 
Supplying developers with notices/bags etc 
will restart once safe to do so, while some 
have begun requesting these without 
prompting.  
Regular supply of instruction letters to 
developers to be included in the induction 
packs of residents. Improved information in 
the bin stores including posters on wall and 
recycling stickers on bins .  
 
Progress: Ongoing with these letters and 
stickers still being requested alongside new 
developments.     
T25 Target 2 5. Zero waste going to landfill by 2050     8944.74     
25.1 Identify, establish & 
deliver necessary 
measures to achieve 
zero waste to landfill 
from domestic 
properties  
 More land available for other uses 
such as renewable energy.  
 
Closure of recycling centres 
combined with a surge in waste 
from lockdown clear -outs will have 
increased waste and decreased Reuse, recycle and recover 
100% of WBC waste from 
domestic properties by moving 
waste up the waste hierarchy 
and increasing potential savings 
from landfill diversion.  
 Comprehensive communications campaign 
on "Reuse" and "Appropriate Recycling" 
including website, social media, 
GreenRedeem and target campaigns to 
divert as much recycles from waste as 
possible.  
 Long term  
   
8944.74   
 
 
Note: This is 
out of scope 
so not    
 TBC 
    
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 73  
 REF Action  Co-Benefits / Covid Lessons  Description / Outcome  Milestone /Progress  Time Scale  Annual 
Carbon 
Savings tCO 2e Project 
Cost  (£) RAG  
Partners – Green 
Redeem, re3  recycling rates. However, going 
forward people have started to give 
more to charity shops and find ways 
to re -use/sell unwanted ite ms 
rather than disposing of them, while 
also being more selective of waste 
on the whole, so as to not overload 
general waste when limited disposal 
is available.  
 
Reduction in oil demand has caused 
the relative cost of recycled 
material to rise, meaning it may be 
more difficult to recycle everything 
without legislative actions.  
 This will generate 8944.74   
 tco2e savings  Progress: Ongoing campaigns and actions in 
previous targets are significantly 
contributing towards a reduction in waste to 
landfill.  included in 
overall figures  
 
  
Tagging contamination recycling and leave 
uncollected.  
 
Progress: Consultation regarding 
enforcement is ongoing.   
Identify alternate markets for hard to 
recycle items.  
 
Progress: Combustion has been identified as 
one potential avenue of energy generation 
to minimise existing fossil fuel use.   
 
*Action 25. Note, t his action has been removed and it was explored and the decision made not to take it forward . Full details are included in the methodology.  
**Action 28 has been removed from the table as it has been incorporated into the carbon savings column and methodology  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 74  
 New Development  
 
Carbon savings: None to report at this time.   
 
The Local Plan Update (LPU) is progressing. The Draft Local Plan was 
published for consultation in February 2020.  The pre -submission 
consultation was anticipated to follow in the Autumn 2020.  Subsequent to 
the publication of the Draft Local Plan, the emergency planning 
arrangements around AWE Burghfield were unexpectedly extended to 
incorporate land in the Graz eley area for the first time.   
 
The strategy proposed by the Draft Local Plan included the establishment 
of a new garden settlement at Grazeley to accommodate the future, long 
term development needs.  The extension of the emergency planning 
arrangements m ade this strategy realistically unachievable, necessitating 
the consideration of alternative approaches.  The programme for the Local 
Plan Update is in the process of being finalised, but consultation on an 
alternative strategy is anticipated in Autumn 2021 .  
 
Turning to those policy areas which are not impacted by the above, these 
are being refined with consideration given to feedback received through 
the consultation. IN addition, specific climate change evidence has been 
commissioned to support policy dev elopment . This is a key part of 
evidencing that the requirements will contribute towards the goals 
relating to new development in the Climate Emergency Action Plan.  
 
The council owned development has been assessed and measures to 
improved energy efficiency , reduce carbon emissions, and when possible, 
make new buildings net -zero carbon have been introduced.  
 
Our Key Achievements  
• Initial assessment to all new council development to assess stage of 
development and possible interventions to committed buildings . 
• Dinton Activity Centre , the first carbon -positive building built in the 
Borough. The new building will generate all of its own power (using 
solar panels and heat pumps) and  will generate more green energy 
than it uses.    Our Partners  
The following partners are vital to completing the action listed in the 
action plan below: Development Management and Delivery, Building 
Control, Developers, Housing Associations  and the h ighways authority  as 
well as consulting with the local community and  stakeholders.  
 
Although much of the targets and goals involved in this section of the 
action plan are focused on infrastructure and planning, behaviour change 
remains important for residents to understand the value of these new 
innovations and interventio ns in the development sector. The council will 
continue to communicate about these new technologies and explain how 
they are part of the solution and why they are important.  
 
Consumption Emissions  
The construction industry is very material focused and thus , has a high 
level of consumption emissions associated. These emissions are out of 
scope and not considered at this time.  
 
Future Opportunities  
The council  responded to a consultation on the Future Home Standards to 
ensure the ability for Local Plans to s et higher energy performance 
standards for all new homes. The government has set out plans to radically 
improve the energy performance of new homes, with low carbon heating 
and be zero carbon ready by 2025.  
 
These homes are expected to produce 75-80% lower carbon emissions 
compared to current levels. To ensure industry is ready to meet the new 
standards by 2025, new homes will be expected to produce 31% lower 
carbon emissions from 2021. Existing homes will also be subject to higher 
standards – with a significant improvement on the standard for 
extensions, making homes warmer and reducing bills.   SDG S 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 75  
 REF Action  Description  / Outcome  Co-benefits / Unintended 
consequences  Milestone  Timeline  Carbon 
Savings  
tCO 2e Project 
Cost  RAG  
T26 Target 26. Towards the end of 2023, major residential development to be designed and built to achieve carbon neutrality        
26.1 Require major 
residential 
development to 
achieve carbon 
neutrality  Policy within the new Local Plan will 
require residential developments of 10 
or more dwellings to provide carbon 
neutral homes. A definition of what 
carbon neutral means in this context will 
be provided. Where there is robust 
evidence that this cannot be a chieved on 
site, the council proposes to accept 
appropriate carbon offset financial 
contributions.  
 
Policy in place upon adoption of new 
Local Plan   A chance for Wokingham Borough 
Council  to take the lead and set an 
exemplar approach   Prepare climate change evidence 
base in support of the Local Plan 
Update (LPU). This will be a key part 
of evidencing the requirements set 
out in the draft plan and will 
contribute towards the goals relating 
to new development in the Climate 
Emergency Action Plan.  Short 
term  Neutral  Nil  
Cheaper future operational costs for 
residents  Consult on draft policy as part of the 
Draft Local Plan.  
 
Publish draft policy as part of the Pre -
Submission Local Plan.  
 
Policy included within adopted Local 
Plan.  Short 
term  Neutral  Nil  
26.2 Provide guidance to 
support major 
residential 
development to 
achieve carbon 
neutrality  A Supplementary Planning Document 
(SPD) will support the new Local Plan by 
providing  additional detail on how 
development of all types is expected to 
demonstrate the achievement of the 
policy requirements, including carbon 
neutrality. The SPD will itself b e subject 
to consultation and formally adopted.  
Adoption can only follow the adoption of 
the new Local Plan.  
 
Guidance in place upon adoption of new 
Supplementary Planning Document  
 
  Greater clarity to developers and 
homeowners  Consult on draft Supplementary  
Planning Document.  
 
Adopt Supplementary Planning 
Document.  Medium 
term  Neutral  Nil   
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 76  
 REF Action  Description  / Outcome  Co-benefits / Unintended 
consequences  Milestone  Timeline  Carbon 
Savings  
tCO 2e Project 
Cost  RAG  
T27 Target 27. From 202 3, major non -residential development to be designed  and built to achieve the BREEAM excellent standard    Neutral     
27.1 Require major non -
residential 
development to 
achieve BREEAM 
excellent standard  BREEAM is an internationally recognised 
certification scheme. It provides a holistic 
set of criteria to support the delivery of 
energy efficient developments, which are 
resilient to the impacts, and mitigate the 
effects, of climate change. Development 
prop osals will be expected to 
demonstrate how they have met this 
standard (or future equivalent) as a 
minimum.  
 
Policy in place upon adoption of new 
Local Plan  Less stringent standards than major 
development will continue to 
encourage small and medium 
housebu ilders  
 
Clarity and consistency using 
internationally recognised standard.  Consult on draft policy as part of the 
Draft Local Plan (complete).  
 
Publish draft policy as part of the Pre -
Submission Local Plan.  
 
Policy included within adopted Local 
Plan.  Short  
term  Neutral  Nil  
27.2 Provide guidance to 
support major non -
residential 
development to 
achieve carbon 
neutrality  A Supplementary Planning Document 
(SPD) will support the new Local Plan by 
providing  additional detail on how 
development of all types is expected to 
demonstrate the achievement of the 
policy requirements. The SPD will itself 
be subject to consultation and  formally 
adopted.  Adoption can only follow the 
adoption of the new Local Plan.  
 
Guidance in place upon adoption of new 
Supplementary Planning Document  Greater clarity to developers and 
homeowners  Consult on draft Supplementary  
Planning Document.  
 
Adopt Supplementary Planning 
Document.  Medium 
term  Neutral  Nil  
T28 Target 28. Establish a spatial strategy and design framework which promotes active and sustainable travel, sustainable design and cons truction 
and enables biodiversity gain   Neutral      
28.1 Minimise unnecessary 
travel from new 
development , better 
house design for 
working from home  
and better integrated 
IT capability  The new Local Plan will establish a spatial 
strategy which secures a pattern of 
development which allows for more 
people to live and work where journeys 
can be undertaken by walking, cycling 
and public transport.  
Buildings, services and infrastructure 
need to be able to respond to new 
working patterns and needs.  Will help encourage behavioural 
change from residents to undertake 
journeys by active means rather than 
private car.  
 
Will be more likely to choose active 
transport over cars as adults, health 
benefits from exercise. People have 
embraced local green space s. Consult on draft policy as part of the 
Draft Local Plan (complete).  
 
Publish draft policy as part of the Pre -
Submission Local Plan.  
 
Policy included within  adopted Local 
Plan.  Short 
term  Neutral  Nil   
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 77  
 REF Action  Description  / Outcome  Co-benefits / Unintended 
consequences  Milestone  Timeline  Carbon 
Savings  
tCO 2e Project 
Cost  RAG  
 
Policy in place upon adoption of new 
Local Plan  Increased time freedom due to lack of 
commute also increases adoption of 
active transport methods  
28.2 Require 
development, 
including the public 
realm, to be 
accessible to all and 
prioritise walking, 
cycling and other 
sustainable modes of 
transport  Development  will be expected to include 
measures to make walking and cycling 
the mode of choice for shorter journeys, 
both within and through the site, 
including links to facilities, services, bus 
stops and train stations. They will be 
designed so that they are easil y 
navigable for people of all ages and 
physical ability.  
 
Policy in place upon adoption of new 
Local Plan  Will help encourage behavioural 
change from residents to undertake 
journeys by active means rather than 
private car.  
 
Will be more likely to choose active 
transport over cars as adults, health 
benefits from exercise. People have 
embraced green spaces.  
Increased time freedom due to lack of 
commute also increases adoption of 
active transport methods  Consult on draft policy as part of the 
Draft Lo cal Plan (complete).  
 
Publish draft policy as part of the Pre -
Submission Local Plan.  
 
Policy included within adopted Local 
Plan.  Short 
term  Neutral  Nil  
28.3 Require allocations 
for major 
development to 
secure smart and 
sustainable 
approaches that 
champion climate 
change resilience  and 
adaptation  Buildings, services and infrastructure 
need to be able to respond to the 
impacts of climate change. Part of this 
ability relates to ensuring that new 
development is designed to adapt to 
more intense rainfall, the possibility of 
flooding, plus heat waves and droughts. 
The design of developments, including 
the use of materials, therefore need to 
carefully consider matters  such as 
shading, insulation and ventilation, 
surface water runoff and storage and the 
use of appropriate tree and other 
planting.  
 
Policy in place upon adoption of new 
Local Plan  Potential to provide exemplary new 
developments at scale which can 
facilitate wider green and energy 
infrastructure improvements  Consult on draft policy as part of the 
Draft Local Plan (complete).  
 
Publish draft policy as part of the Pre -
Submission Local Plan.  
 
Policy included within adopted Local 
Plan.  Short 
term  Neutral  Nil   
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 78  
 REF Action  Description  / Outcome  Co-benefits / Unintended 
consequences  Milestone  Timeline  Carbon 
Savings  
tCO 2e Project 
Cost  RAG  
28.4 Provide positive 
policy framework for 
retrofitting existing 
buildings  Existing domestic buildings contribute 
around 34% of carbon dioxide emissions 
from within Wokingham Borough, whilst 
existing non -domestic buildings 
contribute around 20%. A permissive 
policy approach to retrofitting the 
existing building stock with measure s 
that enhance sustainability and energy 
efficiency will assist in reducing 
emissions.  
 
Policy in place upon adoption of new 
Local Plan  Limitations in the role of planning 
policy and decision making to influence 
existing buildings, but highlighting a 
permissive approach will assist in 
raising the profile of retrofit.  Consult on draft policy as part of the 
Draft Local Plan (complete).  
 
Publ ish draft policy as part of the Pre -
Submission Local Plan.  
 
Policy included within adopted Local 
Plan.  Short 
term  Neutral  Nil  
T29 Target 29. Support low carbon and renewable energy generation   Neutral   Nil   
29.1 Provide positive 
policy supporting low 
carbon and 
renewable energy 
generation  Due to the benefits which low carbon 
and renewable energy  generation bring 
to tackling climate change, development 
proposals for these will be supported 
unless there are unacceptable impacts 
that outweigh the benefits.  
 
Policy in place upon adoption of  the new 
Local Plan . 
An increase of  renew able energy 
generati on projects being  developed 
across the Borough by local businesses 
and community energy groups .  Greater clarity and assurance to local 
groups and businesses wishing to 
support renewable energy schemes in 
their areas  Consult on draft policy as part of the 
Draft Local Plan (complete).  
 
Publish draft policy as part of the Pre -
Submission Local Plan.  
 
Policy included within adopted Local 
Plan.  Short 
term  Neutral  Nil  
T30 Target 30. From 202 3, all new residential and non -residential buildings to be designed and built to be EV ready        
30.1 Ensure new 
developments make 
adequate provision 
for EV  Electric and hybrid vehicle ownership is 
increasing, and likely to become more 
prevalent. Lack of charging infrastructure 
is a principal barrier to increased use of 
low-emissions vehicles. Therefore,  all 
new developments will be expected to 
design in elect ric vehicle charging 
facilities from the outset.  
 Improved air quality, reduce NOx, 
PM10s, PM25, cheaper to maintain and 
run, better driving experience. Also 
supports more constant energy usage 
for overall l ower emissions from 
production.  
 Consult on draft policy as part of the 
Draft Local Plan (complete).  
 
Publish draft policy as part of the Pre -
Submissio n Local Plan.  
 
Policy included within adopted Local 
Plan.  Short 
term  Neutral  Nil   
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 79  
 REF Action  Description  / Outcome  Co-benefits / Unintended 
consequences  Milestone  Timeline  Carbon 
Savings  
tCO 2e Project 
Cost  RAG  
Policy in place upon adoption of new 
Local Plan  Despite covid and traditional car sales 
declining in the pandemic, EV sales 
have risen across the board.  
T31 Target 31. From 2021 100% of council new development is built to carbon neutral standards         
31.1 All new council 
properties non-
residential will be 
built to the highest 
efficiency standards 
from 2021  Consult on all  future council builds and 
engaged with developers to ensure that 
carbon neutrality is consider from the 
design stage and associated cost is 
identified.  
 
The new development has been placed 
with a consultant to look at carbon 
neutrality and associated buil d costs.  
 
Net zero carbon standards to be 
consider ed for all new developments. 
Move away from ‘gas provision’  to 
cleaner technology  for new build 
properties when possible.    Initial assessment to all new council 
development to assess stage of 
development a nd possible 
interventions to committed buildings  Short 
term  
Neutral  Nil  
Assessment of possible interventions 
to Arborfield School to new carbon  Short 
term  Nil  
Assessment - possible interventions 
to Dinton Activity Centre  Short 
term  Nil  
Assessment - possible interventions 
to Addington scheme  Medium  
term  Nil  
31.2 All new council 
homes will be built to 
the highest efficiency 
standards by 2024  To develop a council led pil ot Passivhaus 
housing scheme by 2021.  
Regeneration of urban improvement 
schemes.  
 
There are around  255 homes in Gorse 
Ride state regeneration project.  
Carbon savings will be informed by the  
feasibility assessment     Gorse Ride development has been 
for preplanning.  It has designed 
houses to the first the first stage of 
Passive House. There will be no gas 
to the domestic houses on the side.  Medium 
term  Confirmed 
by 
feasibility 
assessment   TBC  
 
 
  
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 80  
  
Procurement  
 
REF Action  Description  Outcome  Milestone  Timeline  Carbon S avings  
tCO 2e Project 
Cost  RAG  
T32 Target 32. By 2022, achieve sustainable procu rement practice throughout the c ouncil as part of Corporate Procurement Strategy    Neutral  Nil   
32.1 Include a drafted 
approach to sustainable 
procurement within 
review of Procurement 
Strategy  Goods contracts will consider whole -
life costing including disposal . 
Service and works contracts will 
include carbon neutral ity or 
reduction measures either directly 
or indirectly by their design . Procuring in line with business 
needs and climate emergency 
targets  Procurement to draft update to 
procurement strategy  Short time  Neutral   Nil   
Procurement to seek consultation 
of strategy with SLT  Short time  Neutral   Nil  
Procurement achieve sign off of 
strategy  Short time  Neutral   Nil  
Procurement and CEM 
implementation and 
communication of strategy  Short time  Neutral   Nil  
32.2 Develop a sustainable 
procurement culture and 
associated skills for 
green procurement  Design of an e -learning mod ule 
training people in green 
procurement techniques  All staff members who procure will 
have completed training  Procurement complete E-learning 
design  Short time  Neutral   Nil  
All staff in council who procure to 
complete training  Short time  Neutral   Nil  
32.3 Assess suppliers on 
sustainable procurement 
standards  Evaluation of all suppliers to 
promote sustainability 
proportionate to contract and 
financial constraints  Use of the Standard SQ / inclusion 
of a pass/fail phase in all contract 
evaluations  All buyers/commissioners in the 
council to impose carbon targets 
on our suppliers including 
reporting back of carbon 
production  Short time  Neutral   Nil  
All buyers/commissioners taking 
embedded carbon into account 
when purchasing goods and 
services  Medium time  Neutral   Nil  
Performance Team to name the 
top 20 carbon producers from our 
suppliers  Medium time  Neutral   Nil  
32.4 Implementation of 
sustainable procurement 
KPIs amongst suppliers  Contracts have sustainability KPIs 
included where suitable to contracts 
scope  All contracts with sustainability 
KPIs will be performing within the 
'green' threshold (or equivalent) 
for these KPIs  All buyers/commissioners embed 
carbon KPI targets into all suitable 
council contracts  Medium time  Neutral   Nil  
32.5 Informed suppliers of the 
councils  sustainable 
procurement 
requirements  Consult local and national business 
during the development of council’s 
sustainable procurement policy. 
Provide clear and detail ed Reduce carbon through agreed 
more sustainable procurement 
contracts.  CEM and procurement / place 
commissioning / community, 
insight and change complete 
business consultation event  Medium time  Neutral   Nil   
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 81  
 REF Action  Description  Outcome  Milestone  Timeline  Carbon S avings  
tCO 2e Project 
Cost  RAG  
instructions to suppliers on the 
council’s sustainability requirements  
T33 Target 33. By 2023, the council will consider social value , including carbon neutrality, in all its procurement cycles    Neutral    Nil   
33.1 Introducing a culture of 
carbon neutrality in all 
council procurement 
activities  For environmental s ocial value, 
include carbon impact into the 
council's  principal business activities:  
• Business Needs Analysis and Case 
Approval.  
• Contract and Specification 
Design.  
• Bid Submission Evaluations.  
• Contract and Supplier 
Management.  Social Value will be considered at all 
appropriate stages of the 
procureme nt cycle relevant to 
project's scope, risk and value  All buyers/commissioners ens ure 
that the corporate strategy  themes 
of carbon neutrality is embedded  in 
each procurement cycle . 
 
The Street Cleansing team have 
trialled battery operated kit for 
maintenance purposes with good 
results as part of a review.  Short term  Neutral     Nil  
33.2 Adopt a WBC Social Value 
Policy  Generation of a WBC Social Value 
policy  Policy links to corporate 
procurement strategy  Place commissioning / community, 
insight and change draft social value 
policy  Short term  
Neutral    Nil   
Place commissioning / community, 
insight  and change (with CEM) 
complete consultation of policy with 
businesses  Short term  Neutral   
Nil   
Place commissioning / community, 
insight and change complete 
consultation of policy with SLT  Short term  Neutral   Nil   
Place commissioning / community, 
insight and change implement 
communication of policy via CEM  Medium 
term  Neutral   Nil   
33.3 Engage with businesses to 
successfully guarantee a 
transition to the new 
requirements  Consultation and market event with 
external stakeholders  Business will be informed in how to 
successful ly meet our requirements; 
Investigate opportunities from big 
businesses to train SME and VCSE in 
bid writing , social value etc.  See target 34.7 milestones  Medium 
term  Neutral   Nil   
33.4 Promote local skills and 
employment  Where appropriate, locally -based 
suppliers will be used for all direct 
award and quotation processes  
 
Improve Skills for low carbon 
transition  Increased local usage of SMEs and 
trade speople /businesses to reduce 
carbon impact from logistics and 
travel where  compliant  
 
Support a just transition for workers 
by supporting those in traditional 
'high carbon industries to retrain  All buyers / commissioners to 
impose SME/local supply targets on 
suppliers including reporting back of 
SME/local supplier subcontracting  
and carbon reduction  Medium 
term  Neutral   Nil   
Performance Team name the top 20 
suppliers supporting scheme  Medium 
term    
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 82  
 Engagement and Behavioural Change  
 
Carbon savings: Engagement and behavioural change  drives carbon 
savings through out the other sections of the plan.  
 
This section of the action plan focuses  on engagement with the aim of 
promoting and accelerating the shift to more sustainable be haviours 
amongst our residents, businesses, schools and community organisations  
and will feed into the carbon savings achieved elsewhere on this action 
plan such as increased use of public transport , as well as reducing out of 
scope emissions from purchase s of goods and services . The majority of the 
actions are therefore listed as ‘Neutral’ for their carbon savings.  
 
Our Key Achievements  
• Wokingham Borough Council has held its first virtual event with 
businesses focusing on the road to decarbonisation of bu siness 
operations.  
• The council has held a series of collaborative events with the town and 
parish council, covering the key priority areas within influence to help 
tackle the climate emergency.  
• Wokingham Borough Council has worked to improve climate 
emerge ncy messaging in external communication regarding 
associated projects, such as the completion of the new Dinton Activity 
Centre.  
• Council staff receive monthly  internal  communications regarding an 
issue around sustainability in the workplace and how this can be 
tackled at an individual and organisational level.  
 
Our Partners  
Wokingham Borough Council is keen to engage with as many stakeholders 
as possible within the bor ough  in order to drive sustainable behaviour 
change . This includes businesses, community and voluntary organisations, 
schools and young people, council colleagues and residents more 
generally. Working in partnership with all stakeholders is vital to tackli ng 
the climate emergency which is not possible alone.   
 
Wokingham Borough Council  particularly aims to work closely with the 
borough’s Town and Parish councils to further engagement and  behaviour 
change opportunities across the borough and collaborate with associated     community organisations wherever possible going forward. Behaviour 
change is vital to achieving many of the goals throughout this action plan 
which rely on uptake of tech nologies, initiatives and schemes by local 
residents and businesses in order to result in the associated CO 2 savings.  
 
Consumption Emissions  
The engagement targets below are to reduce overall carbon footprints of 
our residents which includes all 3 scopes o f emissions , including indirect or 
‘consumption’ emissions which includes out of borough travel, goods and 
services purchased, food choices etc.  
 
Future Opportunities  
Wokingham Borough Council  hopes that more opportunities will become 
available through grant funding in the coming year which can be promoted 
to or applied in partnership with  community or charitable organisations 
with an environmental focus.   
 
The government’s Build Back Better strategy will enable more policy and 
mean more opportunities will become available for businesses at a local 
level, particularly in promoting the green sector  and the n ew skills needed 
to fill gaps in this emerging markets .  
 
Both of these  opportunities with be thoroughly built into the upcoming 
Climate Emergency Engagement & Behaviour Change Strategy. Which is 
explained in more detail below in Target 3 4.1 which has been added to the 
action plan . The intention is to develop and implement an  engagement 
and behaviour  change strategy that is specifically targeted towards 
tackling the climate emergency and will dictate the actions within this 
section of the plan going forward, once approved and published.  
 
The strategy will ensure that all voic es are heard and accounted for  and 
investigate how to overcome the issue of behaviour change which is one 
of the biggest barriers to tackling the climate emergency with most of us 
choosing the path of convenience . A key part of this plan will be a visionin g 
project which will work with stakeholders and engage residents via an 
innovative project which will inspire everyone in the borough to achieve a 
net zero carbon borough by 2030.   SDG S 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 83  
  REF Action  Description   
/Outcomes  Co-benefits/Unintended 
Consequences  Milestone s/Progress  Timeline  Carbon 
Savings  tCO 2e Project 
Cost  RAG  
34 Target 3 4. Raise awareness in the community about the climate emergency agenda        
34.1  Implement a Wokingham 
Borough Council  Climate 
Emergency Engagement 
& Behaviour Change 
Strategy.  Ensure there is a long -term plan for 
the delivery of sustained 
communication with all stakeholders 
in the borough needed to tackle the 
climate emergency, including 
residents, businesses, young peop le, 
council staff and the Town and Parish 
Councils.  Ensure this engagement 
programme is  as inclusive as 
possible.  Options appraisal to inform on different 
engagement methods.  
 
Options appraisal has been written.  Short 
term  Neutral  
Budget is 
not yet 
set/ 
allocated   
Complete a visioning project to allow for 
residents, businesses, community 
organisations and young people to envisage 
how a net zero carbon borough will look in 
2030.  Short 
term  
Neutral – 
potential for 
accelerated 
achievements 
within this 
plan  
Investigate behaviour change programme 
available for residents to shift to more 
sustainable choices and be rewarded for 
forming these new habits.  
 
Draft option appraisal.  Short to 
medium 
term   
Draft the Climate Emergency Engagement & 
Behaviour Change Strategy for approval at 
Council.  Short to 
long term   
Consult with community -based  
organisations and town & parish council’s 
on the strategy.  Short 
term   
Support Town and Parish councils to share 
best practice and lessons learned to set out 
a path to net zero carbon in their own 
operations, where possible.  Short to 
medium 
term   
34.2  Actively communicate the 
progress of the climate 
emergency initiatives 
delivered borough -wide  Deliver a sustained campaign to 
support the delivery of the Climate 
Emergency Action Plan and ensure 
ongoing engagement.  Residents receive one clear 
message from all the workstreams 
within the climate emergency 
action plan.  Ensure climate emergency messaging is 
intertwined with comms plans for projects 
sat within the climate emergency action 
plan across the council, such as transport, 
waste and development projects.  Short 
term  Neutral  Nil  
34.3 Provide and share 
information with 
residents on how to 
reduce their carbon 
emissions . Inform on 
economic incentives 
‘Green Bank’ that will Develop a sustained campaign to 
provide information, advice, and 
signposting to promote behavioural 
change amongst residents  to drive 
engagement with council initiatives . 
 A greener, healthier borough.  Set up a resident  climate emergency  
newsletter  to promote the actions the 
council are taking an d focus on how 
individual actions can make a big difference.  Short 
term  Neutral  Nil   
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 84  
  REF Action  Description   
/Outcomes  Co-benefits/Unintended 
Consequences  Milestone s/Progress  Timeline  Carbon 
Savings  tCO 2e Project 
Cost  RAG  
support the adoption of 
carbon neutral 
technologies.  Engage residents with opportunities to 
improve energy performance of 
homes and buildings, reduce carbon 
emissions from transpor t, adopt new 
behaviours . 
34.5 Provide communications 
support  to promote  
sustainable action taking 
place in schools.   Develop a sustained communications 
campaign to provide information, 
advice, and signposting to promote 
behavioural change amongst 
schoolchildren  and staff and giving  
more background to link the action to 
the climate emergency.   
 
Residents of the borough will gain a 
better understanding of why s chool  
children and staff are making 
sustainable changes and will be better 
informed on how t his can be applied 
to their own lifestyle.  Building stronger relationships 
with schools and enhancing 
intergenerational learning.  Align engagement campaigns to the climate 
emergency program me designed for 
schools and d eliver engagement campaigns  
to inspire children and school staff to adopt 
new behaviours . Short 
term  Neutral  Nil  
34.6 Support changes in work 
practices and behavioural 
change amongst council 
staff Wokingham Borough Council  staff to 
be better informed on their impact as 
an organisation and how to drive this 
impact down through projects and 
communications, p rovid ing 
information, advice  & signposting to 
promote behavioural change amongst 
council employees (e.g. active and 
sustainable t ravel, increase d plant 
based food ). Healthier staff living more 
sustainable lifestyles.  
 
Reducing the council’s own carbon 
footprint as an organisation.  Deliver a sustained communications 
campaign through the council’s Green 
Team to inspire  staff to  reduce their 
personal carbon footprints by making 
sustainable shifts in their daily routines.  
Short 
term  The first 
assessment of 
the council’s 
carbon 
footprint is 
1.7tCO 2 
Please see 
page 16 for 
full detail.  Nil  
Investigate and promote the carbon 
footprint of Wokingham Borough Council as 
an organisation and workplace and how 
individual actions of staff contribute 
towards this.   
Communicate environmental  benefits and 
carbon savings of the Workplace 
Reimagine d project to ensure staff are fully 
informed.  
Investigate a behaviour change platform for 
business use . No budget 
confirmed   
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document          Page | 85  
  REF Action  Description   
/Outcomes  Co-benefits/Unintended 
Consequences  Milestone s/Progress  Timeline  Carbon 
Savings  tCO 2e Project 
Cost  RAG  
34.7 Support changes in work 
practices and behavioural 
change amongst local 
businesses   Provide information, advice, 
signposting to promote sustainable  
behaviours amongst local businesses 
(e.g. remote working, retrofitting 
buildings, sola r PV installation)  
The Covid -19 pandemic has put a 
strain on the economy. Although 
Wokingham Borough is a relatively 
resilient economy, there are 
sectors which have struggled and 
youth unemployment is up.  
 
The economic recovery out of the 
pandemic has put into green 
recovery policy at the top of the 
centra l government agenda.  Host events to stimulate the conversation 
around sustainability in business between 
the council and the business community . 
 
Ensure the conversation is kept going 
through regular climate emergency articles 
in the Business Matters newsletter.  
 
The council held its first Climate 
Conversations event. A virtual webinar -style 
event with a discussion panel of local 
experts. The theme was ‘The Road to 
Decarbonisation’.  
Short 
term  Neutral   
  Nil  
Promote working from home practices 
to reduce the proportion  of staff at 
corporate sites  for m ore efficient use 
of the space.  Assessment of unintended consequences 
from the national lockdown (COVID -19) and 
the effects to energy consumption and site 
occupancy of corporate sites.   Nil  
Ensure the climate emergency action 
plan is fully aligned with the 
Wokingham Borough Council ’s 
Economic Recovery Strategy which 
focuses on enabling local business to 
Build Back Better.   
Align the climate emergency 
engagement with businesses with the 
govern ment’s plan for a Green 
Recovery  to build back better from the 
economic consequences of the Covid -
19 pandemic.  Incorporate into the Climate Emergency 
Engagement & Behaviour Change Strategy.  Nil  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document         
 Page | 86  
 Appendix 1. Data Sources  
 
Table 5: Summary GHG inventory table Breakdown of building emissions, tCO 2e as 
split by SCATTER  
SUB-SECTOR  DIRECT  INDIRECT  
tCO 2e tCO 2e 
Residential buildings   187,968.61   78,875.18  
Commercial buildings & facilities   11,254.16   42,841.08  
Institutional buildings & facilities   8,831.41   9,301.94  
Industrial buildings & facilities   32,229.12   52,294.99  
Agriculture   2,804.37   0.52  
Fugitive emissions   23,738.05   -    
On-road   305,851.95   IE  
Rail  11,438.37   IE  
Waterborne navigation   NO   IE  
Aviation   NO   IE  
Off-road   3,058.52   IE  
Solid waste disposal   6,664.21   -    
Biological treatment   NO   -    
Incineration and open burning   NO   -    
Wastewater   9,888.15   -    
Industrial process   44,871.97   -    
Industrial product use   0.00   -    
Livestock   9,383.60   -    
Land use  -15,861.55   -    
Other AFOLU   NE   -    
Electricity -only generation   NO   -    
CHP generation   132.57   -    
Heat/cold generation   NO   -    
Local renewable generation   2.01   NO  
Notation keys:   
NO - Not Occurring  IE - Integrated Elsewhere  NE - Not Estimated  
  
Table 6: Summary GHG inventory table Breakdown of building emissions, tCO 2e as 
split by SCATTER  
Wokingham Carbon footprint  
 580 KtCO 2e KtCO 2e 
Industry and Commercial Electricity  93.71  
Industry and Commercial Gas  39.75  
Large Industrial Installations  0.01  
Industrial and Commercial Other Fuels  17.30  
Agriculture  3.92  
Domestic Electricity  71.47  
Domestic Gas  177.23  
Domestic 'Other Fuels'  10.17  
Road Transport (A roads)  85.51  
Road Transport (Minor roads)  88.73  
Transport Other  8.30  
LULUCF Net Emissions  -15.19  
 
 
Notes:  
• BEIS data (right -hand table) and SCATTER data are compiled using different 
methodologies. The SCATTER model (Setting City Area Targets and Trajectories 
for Emissions Reductions) operates on 2016 data. BEIS data is from 2017. See 
page 52 for further notes  on why the data differs between SCATTER & BEIS.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document         
 Page | 87  
  
Data Sources  – Frequent ly Asked Questions  
 
What do the different emissions categories 
mean within the SCATTER Inventory?  
 
Direct = GHG emissions from sources located 
within the Local Authority Boundary (also 
referred to as Scope 1). For example petrol, 
diesel or natural gas.  
 
Indirect = GHG emiss ions occurring as a 
consequence of the use of grid -supplied 
electricity, heat, steam and/or cooling within the 
city boundary (also referred to as Scope 2).  
 
Other = All other GHG emissions that occur 
outside the city boundary as a result of activities 
taking place within the city boundary (also 
referred to as Scope 3). This category is not 
complete and only shows sub -categories 
required for CDP / Global Covenant of Mayors 
reporting. Other Scope 3 emissions are however 
explored within Sections 2 and 3.  
 
The BEIS Local Emissions Summary does not 
differentiate between direct/indirect/other (or 
the various ‘scopes’  
 
 
 
  
What do the different sectors and subsectors 
represent within the SCATTER Inventory?  
 
• The Direct Emissions Summary and Subsector 
categori es are aligned to the World Resource 
Institute’s Global Protocol for Community -Scale 
Greenhouse Gas Emission Inventories (“GPC”), as 
accepted by CDP and the Global Covenant of 
Mayors.  
• The BEIS Local Emissions Summary represents 
Local Authority level dat a published annually by 
the Department for Business Energy & Industrial 
Strategy (BEIS).  
• Stationary energy includes emissions 
associated with industrial buildings and facilities 
(e.g. gas & electricity).  
• IPPU specifically relates to emissions that ar ise 
from production of products within the following 
industries: Iron and steel, Non -ferrous metals, 
Mineral products, Chemicals. These are derived 
from DUKES data (1.1 -1.3 & 5.1).  
• Waterborne Navigation and Aviation relate to 
trips that occur within the  region. The figures are 
derived based on national data (Civil Aviation 
Authority & Department for Transport) and 
scaled to the City of Oxford region.  
   
 
Why does the BEIS summary differ from the 
SCATTER summary?  
 
• The BEIS summary represents CO 2 only; 
SCATTER also includes emissions factors for 
other greenhouse gases such as Nitrous Oxide 
(N20) and Methane (CH 4). These are reported as 
a CO 2 ’equivalents (e)’.  
• The BEIS summary does not provide scope 
split; SCATTER reports emissions by scope 1, 2, 
and 3 (i.e. direct, indirect or other categories).  
• The BEIS summary categories are not directly 
consistent or mapped to the BEIS LA fuel data 
which is avail able as a separate data set. 
SCATTER uses published fuel data and applies 
current -year emissions factors, whereas the BEIS 
data calculations scale down national emissions 
in each transport area. Specifically with regard to 
road transport, BEIS data splits total emissions 
across road type; SCATTER uses fuel 
consumption for on -road transport per LA.  
• Different treatment of ‘rural’ emissions i.e. 
Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Use 
(AFOLU) and Land Use, Land Use Change & 
Forestry (LULUCF) categories are  derived from 
different underlying data sets and have been 
explored further within section 3 of this report.   
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document         
 Page | 88  
 Appendix 2. Glossary  
 
Term  Definition  
Carbon 
Baseline  The year against which target decreases in emissions are measured.4 
Carbon dioxide 
(CO 2) Carbon dioxide is a gas in the Earth's atmosphere. It occurs naturally and is 
also a by -product of human activities such as burning fossil fuels. It is the 
principal greenhouse gas produced by human activity.  
Carbon Budget  A tolerable quantity of greenhouse gas emissions that can be emitted in 
total over a specified time. The budget needs to be in line with what is 
scientifically required to keep global warming and thus climate change 
“tolerable.”  
Carbon dioxide 
equi valent 
(CO 2e)  Six greenhouse gases are limited by the Kyoto Protocol and each has a 
different global warming potential. The overall warming effect of this 
cocktail of gases is often expressed in terms of carbon dioxide equivalent - 
the amount of CO2 that would cause the same amount of warming.  
For consistency in this climate emergency action plan, the figures on  carbon 
dioxide emissions have been presented in tonnes tCO 2e 
Carbon 
footprint  The amount of carbon emitted by an individual, organisation, geographical 
area or during the manufacture of a product in a given period of time.  
Carbon neutral  A process where there is no net release of CO2. For example, growing 
biomass takes CO2 out of t he atmosphere, while burning it releases the gas 
again. The process would be carbon neutral if the amount taken out and the 
amount released were identical. A company or country can also achieve 
carbon neutrality by means of carbon offsetting  in limiting qu antities not all 
together . 
Carbon 
offsetting  A way of compensating for emissions of CO2 by participating in, or funding, 
efforts to take CO2 out of the atmosphere. Offsetting often involves paying 
 
4 https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/science -environment -11833685  
5 https://www.theccc. org.uk/2014/03/04/the -climate -change -act-a-retrospective/  
6 https://commonslibrary.parliament.uk/insights/acting -on-climate -change -the-plan-for-net-zero-
emissions -in-the 
uk/#:~:text=Net%20zero%20is%20a%20statutory,emissions%20by%2080%25%20by%202050.  another party, somewhere else, to save emissions equivalent to those 
produced by your activity.  
Carbon 
Sequestration  The process of storing carbon dioxide. This can happen naturally, as growing 
trees and plants turn CO2 into biomass (wood, leaves, and so on). It can also 
refer to the capture and storage of CO2 produced by industry.  
Climate Change  A pattern of change affecting global or regional climate, as measured by 
yardsticks such as average temperature and rainfall, or an alteration in 
frequency of extreme weather conditions. This variation may be caused by 
both natural processes and human activi ty. Global warming is one aspect of 
climate change.  
Climate Change 
Act (2008)  At the core of the Act is the 2050 target to reduce UK greenhouse gas 
emissions by at least 80% relative to 1990, and the system of carbon 
budgets that provide five -year steppin g stones to the 2050 target5. In 2019 
this target was altered to achieve net zero emissions by 20506. 
Climate 
Emergency  A situation in which urgent action is required to reduce or halt climate 
change and avoid potentially irreversible environmental dama ge resulting 
from it.7 
Climate 
Emergency 
Declaration  The recognition of the urgency of the Climate Emergency by organisations, 
businesses or government at any level, often resulting in setting a target 
date to become carbon neutral.  
The Committee 
on Cli mate 
Change (CCC)  An independent, statutory body established under the Climate Change Act 
2008 whose purpose is to advise the UK and devolved governments on 
emissions targets and to report to Parliament on progress made in reducing 
greenhouse gas emissions and preparing for and adapting to the impacts of 
climate change.8 
Decarbonise  To replace fossil fuels as fuel source with a fuel that is less harmful to the 
environment such as solar power. See Renewable energy.  
Emission 
Trading Scheme 
(ETS)  A scheme set up to allow the trading of emissions permits between business 
and/or countries as part of a cap and trade approach to limiting greenhouse 
gas emissions by businesses or countries buying or selling allowances to 
emit greenhouse gases via an exch ange. The volume of allowances issued 
7 https://www.oxfordlearnersdictionaries.com/  
8 https://www.theccc. org.uk/about/   
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document         
 Page | 89  
 adds up to the limit, or cap, imposed by the authorities. The best -developed 
example is the EU's trading system , launched in 2005.  
Fossil fuels  Natural resources, such as coal, oil and natural gas, containing 
hydroca rbons. These fuels are formed in the Earth over millions of years and 
produce carbon dioxide when burnt.  
Global warming  The steady rise in global average temperature in recent decades, which 
experts believe is largely caused by man -made greenhouse gas emissions. 
The long -term trend continues upwards, even though the warmest year on 
record, according to the UK's Met Office, is 1998.  
Grandfathering  A form of carbon budgeting which allocates a higher carbon budget to those 
organisations or regions, which  emit at a higher levels. In other words, high 
emitting areas will be allowed to emit at higher levels than those with lower 
existing emissions.  
Greenhouse 
gases (GHGs)  Natural and industrial gases that trap heat from the Earth and warm the 
surface. The Paris Agreement, following The Kyoto Protocol restricts 
emissions of six greenhouse gases: natural (carbon dioxide, nitrous oxide, 
and methane) and industrial (perfluoroca rbons, hydrofluorocarbons, and 
sulphur hexafluoride).  
The 
Intergovernme ntal 
Panel on 
Climate Change  
(IPCC)  A scientific body established by the United Nations Environment 
Programme and the World Meteorological Organization. It reviews and 
assesses the mos t recent scientific, technical, and socio -economic work 
relevant to climate change, but does not carry out its own research. The 
IPCC was honoured with the 2007 Nobel Peace Prize.  
Kyoto Protocol  A protocol attached to the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change, 
which sets legally binding commitments on greenhouse gas emissions. 
Industrialised countries agreed to reduce their combined emissions to 5.2% 
below 1990 levels during the five -year period 2008 -2012. It was agreed by 
governments at a 1997 U N conference in Kyoto, Japan, but did not legally 
come into force until 2005. A different set of countries agreed a second 
commitment period in 2013 that will run until 2020.  
Land Use, Land -
Use Change, 
and Forestry 
(LULUCF)  Activities in this category pro vide a method of offsetting emissions, either 
by increasing the removal of greenhouse gases from the atmosphere (i.e. by 
planting trees or managing forests), or by reducing emissions (i.e. by curbing 
deforestation and the associated burning of wood).  
 
9 https://unfccc.int/process -and-meetings/the -paris -agreement/what -is-the-paris -agreement  Mitigation  Action that will reduce man -made climate change. This includes action to 
reduce greenhouse gas emissions or absorb greenhouse gases from the 
atmosphere.  
Net zero carbon  A target to achieving net zero carbon dioxide emissions by balancing carbon 
emissions with carbon offsets and/or eliminating carbon emissions 
altogether.  
Paris 
Agreement 
(2015)  The Agreement’s central aim is to strengthen the global response to the 
threat of climate change by 21 countries agreeing to keep the global 
temperature rise  this century well below 2 degrees Celsius above pre -
industrial levels and to pursue efforts to limit the temperature increase 
even further to 1.5 degrees Celsius9. 
Per-capita 
emissions  The total amount of greenhouse gas emitted by a country per unit of 
population.  
Renewable 
energy  Energy created from sources that can be replenished in a short period of 
time. The five renewable sources used most often are: biomass (such as 
wood and biogas), the movement of water, geothermal (heat from within 
the earth ), wind, and solar.  
SCATTER  Standing for Setting City Area Targets and Trajectories for Emissions 
Reductions, SCATTER is a local authority focussed emissions tool, built to 
help create low -carbon local authorities. SCATTER provides local authorities 
and c ity regions with the opportunity to standardise their greenhouse gas 
reporting and align to international frameworks, including the setting of 
targets in line with the Paris Climate Agreement.  
Tyndall Centre  A partnership of universities bringing together  researchers from the social 
and natural sciences and engineering to develop sustainable responses to 
climate change, working with leaders from the public and private sectors to 
promote informed decisions on mitigating and adapting to climate change10. 
The United 
Nations 
Framework 
Convention on 
Climate Change 
(UNFCCC)  One of a series of international agreements on global environmental issues 
adopted at the 1992 Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro. The UNFCCC aims to 
prevent "dangerous" human interference with  the climate system. It 
entered into force on 21 March 1994 and has been ratified by 192 countries.  
 
10 https://tyndall.ac.uk/about   
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document         
 Page | 90  
 Appendix 3. Sustainable Development Goals  
 
The 2030 United Nations Agenda for Sustainable Development11, provides a 
shared blueprint for peace and prosperity for people and the planet, now and 
into the future. At its heart are 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), 
which act as an urgent call for action to all countries - developed and 
developing – to wor k as a global partnership. They recognize that ending 
poverty and deprivation must go hand -in-hand with strategies that improve 
health and education, reduce inequality, and spur economic growth – at the 
same time as tackling climate change and working to p reserve our oceans and 
forests.  
 
Wokingham Borough Council and the Sustainable Development Goals  
 
The Local Government Association (LGA) passed a motion in July 2019 declaring 
a climate emergency. At the same time offering a unified voice for local 
govern ment to assist in delivering the UN’s 17 Sustainable Development Goals 
(SDGs). In the table below each goal has been assigned an SDG number. For 
example, Good Health and Wellbeing is SDG3 and links back to the appropriate 
action in the Climate Emergency Ac tion Plan demonstrating how Wokingham 
Borough are supporting the UN’s 17 Sustainable Development Goals.  
 
Wokingham Borough Council recognises that, as a local authority, we are in the 
best position to raise awareness and to influence in the delivery of the  
Sustainable Development Goals.  
 
 
 
11 Resolution adopted by the UN General Assembly on 25 September 2015.  No poverty  
SDG1  
  Although Wokingham is an affluent borough, we will 
work hard to ensure the Climate Emergency action 
plan creates a sustainable, carbon neutral economy 
that will achieve economic justice as well as 
economic growth.   
Zero hunger  
SDG2  As a rural borough, sustainable agricultural practice is 
of high importance as well as promoting sustainable 
eating in the borough through the action plan which 
focuses on cutting down on meat consumption.   
Good health 
and wellbeing  
SDG3  We will be encouraging sustainable transport such as 
cycling and converting to electric vehicles through 
our action plan to ensure we maintain our high level 
of well -being across the borough   
Quality of 
education  
SDG4  The youth ful population are a large part of our action 
plan to meet our 2030 net zero carbon target and we 
aim to promote sustainable lifestyles throughout our 
schools and ensure we hear the voices of our 
children.   
Gender 
equality  
SDG5  
  We hope the women and girls in the borough will 
take part to make the action plan the most effective 
in everyday situations like reducing waste and single 
use plastics.   
Clean water 
and sanitation  
SDG6  There is a strong focus on reducing water waste in 
the Borough which will comply with the sustainable 
management of water targets sat beneath this SDG.   
Affordable 
and clean 
energy  
SDG7  We are determined to roll out sustainable energy 
generating methods through the implementation of 
solar panels, particularly in our SDLs, which are both 
clean and affordable in the long term.   
 
Wokingham Borough Council - Climate Emergency Action Plan - Working Document         
 Page | 91  
 Decent Work 
and economy 
growth  
SDG8  Wokingham Borough benefits from a below average 
unemployment rate and bringing more sustainable 
enterprises to the borough will only enhance our 
working population further.   
Industry, 
innovation 
and 
infrastructure  
SDG9  A large section of our action plan is dedicated to 
ensuring our new developments are net zero carbon 
through sustainable infrastructure and that we 
promote sustainable leaving within these new 
communities.   
Reduce 
inequalities  
SDG10  The UK suffers from vast disparities in wealth  but this 
can also be seen on a local scale within the Borough. 
We aim to work the Climate Emergency action plan 
with economic development in mind to ensure we 
achieve economic equality throughout the borough.   
Sustainable 
cities and 
communities  
SDG11  Wokingham Borough is lucky to have an existent 
community that is resilient, inclusive and safe. We 
aim to build on this and strengthen this through the 
action plan to promote the same characteristics for 
the communities created in the new  developments.   
Responsible 
consumption 
and 
production  
SDG12  The themes of this goal are woven throughout the 
action plan to promote and encourage a change in 
lifestyle of the residents in the borough starting with 
the council staff through the work of the Green 
Team.   
Climate action  
SDG13  By working towards our 2030 net zero carbon 
borough target we have been able to put in place 
Officer groups and projects that reflect the targets 
under our action plan and enforce action to combat 
climate change.   
Life below 
water  
SDG14  Protecting our bodies of water is essential for us as 
they are facilities for residents to enjoy in green 
space for non -polluting recreational activities   Life on land  
SDG15  Protecting our greenspace as a rural borough is of 
huge significance and is reflected in the action plan, 
as we aim to preserve the land as a carbon sink or 
sustainably develop on land in a way that allows the 
whole borough to reap the sustainable rewards.   
Peace, justice  
and strong 
institutions  
SDG16  As an influential institution in the borough, we take 
our role in combating climate change very seriously 
and will show our respect of our communities 
through public consultation and incorporating 
resident’s ideas throughout our action plan.   
Partnerships 
for the goals  
SDG17  Creating partnerships are an essential aspect of our 
action plan, especially one which is tackling such a 
global problem. Partnerships, especially with the 
businesses in the borough, will allow us to achieve 
more.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
