 
 
Woking 2050 
A Vision for a Sustainable Borough 
 
Summary Strategy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
PDF created with pdfFactory trial version www.pdffactory.com 
 
2 
 Introduction 
 
Fast forward to 2050…what do we want Woking to look like? What kind of place do we want 
Woking to be? 2050 is a long way off, possibly too far ahead in the future to contemplate. 
The reality is that to positively influence the future of the Borough for generations to come, 
we need to plan and act now.  
 
Woking 2050 takes a look at our whole way of living and how it can influence our 
environment. Our goal is a Borough: 
• that protects and enhances its high quality natural environment  
• where resources are used wisely and biodiversity is conserved  
• that has a built environment that is developed sustainably, which meets local needs 
and enables the local economy to prosper  
• that recognises, prepares and adapts to the socio-economic, environmental and 
demographic changes that the future will bring.  
 
Balancing our environmental aspirations and the Borough’s development and economic 
needs is at the heart of this Strategy.         
 
The aim of Woking 2050 is to coordinate a wide range of objectives into one comprehensive 
document that can be used by the Council and Woking’s residents, businesses, community 
groups and others to reduce the Borough’s impact on the environment. By working together 
we can positively influence the future of the Borough for generations to come.  
 
Why 2050? 
The significance of the year 2050 lies in the UK’s Climate Change Act which seeks to reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions by 80% by 2050 on the 1990 baseline. This was adopted as a 
local target as part of the Council’s previous Climate Change Strategy.   
 
A long-term vision requires strategic planning for the future. The key objectives within the 
vision, together with the theme targets, will form the basis of an action plan that will 
accompany and work to deliver the Strategy.  
 
Emissions targets for 2050  
Woking 2050’s target is to reduce carbon emissions by 80% by 2050, using a 1990 baseline. 
Woking’s 1990 baseline is estimated to have been 895,440 tonnes so the target is to reach 
179,088 tonnes by 2050. The latest statistics from the Department of Energy and Climate 
Change (DECC) show that in 2013, Woking’s carbon emissions totalled 575,952 tonnes. 
This is equivalent to a 36% reduction on 1990 levels.  
 
Our homes and the Borough’s commercial and industrial activities account for approximately 
40% each of our carbon footprint. Meanwhile transport accounts for approximately 20% of 
the Borough’s carbon footprint. If these proportions were to continue forward to 2050, in 
order to reach the goal of an 80% overall reduction in emissions, we would need to see the 
following reductions across the sectors from 2013 levels: 
PDF created with pdfFactory trial version www.pdffactory.com 
 
3 
  
 
 
        2013 Emissions   Reduce emissions by         2050 emissions target  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Themes 
Over the next few pages, we summarise the five key themes within Woking 2050.  
The full Strategy, together with sources of further information, is available to download at 
www.woking.gov.uk/environment/climate    
  
 
 Industry & 
Commercial 
233,579 tonnes  69% Industry & 
Commercial 
71,635 tonnes  
Domestic  
217,692 tonnes 
tonnes  67% Domestic  
71,635 tonnes  
tonnes  
Transport  
123,225 tonnes 71% Transport  
35,818 tonnes  
PDF created with pdfFactory trial version www.pdffactory.com 
 
4 
 Theme 1: Home is where the heart is 
Making changes to our everyday activities at home can contribute to a sustainable 
Borough. Energy and water use, the amount of waste we produce, how we shop, and 
our health and well-being all have an impact.  
By making small changes, we can all help contribute to a more sustainable, healthier 
and more economical lifestyle for families and individuals and a greener future for 
Woking.  
A selection of tips is included here. For a full list, check out the full Strategy at 
www.woking.gov.uk/environment/climate   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Utilities: The average household spends 5% of 
its income on energy (ONS Household Energy 
Spending in the UK, 2002-12). By saving energy 
and water you not only help your bank balance 
but you can also reduce the impact you have on 
the environment. Action Surrey is a county-wide 
impartial energy advice centre. Find out how they 
can help you at www.actionsurrey.org . For water 
efficiency tips, check out 
www.woking.gov.uk/environment/climate/canyoud
o/la21/tips#water   
 
Shopping: What we buy and where we buy it 
from can have an impact on the environment. 
Buying local produce, supporting local markets, 
using long-life bags etc can all make a positive 
difference. For more tips on sustainable shopping 
visit 
www.woking.gov.uk/environment/climate/canyoud
o/greenpages/produce or check out the Woking 
Local Food Directory (WoLF) at 
www.wokinglocalfood.org.uk   
PDF created with pdfFactory trial version www.pdffactory.com 
 
5 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Waste: Woking Borough Council empties over 3 
million wheeled bins every year and thanks to our 
residents we recycled 60% of household waste in 
2014/15. Woking Borough Council operates a 
selection of services to make recycling easy, 
simple and convenient for our residents. 
Find out more at 
www.woking.gov.uk/environment/wasterecycle/ho
useholdwaste  
Garden: Our gardens, whether small or large, can 
play an important part in making our urban and 
suburban areas greener, both aesthetically and 
environmentally. RHS research shows that ‘urban 
greening’ can contribute to storm water mitigation 
which helps to reduce garden flooding, provide a 
source of habitats for wildlife, and improve air 
quality. Find out more at 
www.rhs.org.uk/science/gardening-in-a-changing -
world/urban-planting  
Homes of the future: The Woking Core Strategy  
sets out the vision for spatial planning and 
development management in the Borough up to 
2027. It contains policies – like CS22 ‘Sustainable 
construction’ and CS23 ‘Renewable and low 
carbon energy generation’ and guidance like the 
Climate Change Supplementary Planning 
Document (SPD)  - that will help to reduce carbon 
emissions and build resilience to changes in our 
climate and environment.  
 
PDF created with pdfFactory trial version www.pdffactory.com 
 
6 
 Theme 2: In the workplace 
This theme provides general advice and links to further information on how local 
companies can incorporate sustainability into their business. Reducing energy and 
water consumption, enhancing waste and recycling initiatives, promoting sustainable 
transport by staff, and incorporating sustainable procurement practices can all make 
a positive difference – not only to the sustainability objectives for the Borough, but 
also economically for a business.  
 
So how can businesses be more sustainable? We asked the Woking Chamber of 
Commerce for some tips. For a full list, check out the full Strategy at 
www.woking.gov.uk/environment/climate   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 An energy and water audit  can identify where 
savings can be made and create a plan for action. 
Ideas include installing measures such as LED 
lighting and occupancy sensors, or encouraging 
staff to switch off lights and computer screens 
when not in use. Some companies may be 
required to report on their energy use through the 
Carbon Reduction Commitment, so improving 
efficiency and reducing consumption will help. To 
find out more visit www.gov.uk/crc-energy -
efficiency-scheme-qualification-and-registration . 
Company travel plans  that promote audio or 
video conferencing, car sharing, and bike 
schemes can lower business mileage costs and 
emissions, and improve staff health and well-
being. The Energy Saving Trust offers a Green 
Fleet Consultancy Service that can help 
businesses cut carbon and reduce fleet costs. 
Find out more at 
www.energysavingtrust.org.uk/Organisations/Tran
sport/Products-and-services/Fleet-advice/Fleet-
Health-Check  Waste reduction and recycling initiatives : 
Central waste collection points help small 
businesses. Removing individual bins from 
employee desks in favour of central sorting bins, 
encourages staff to recycle more.  
 
PDF created with pdfFactory trial version www.pdffactory.com 
 
7 
 Theme 3: Getting around 
This theme looks at how we can make positive changes to the sustainability of the 
Borough by adopting sustainable modes of transport. The Council will promote 
sustainable transport, walking and cycling, and electric vehicles in order to contribute 
to a cleaner, greener Borough.   
Transport accounts for just over 20% of Woking Borough’s carbon footprint (source 
DECC local authority carbon statistics 2012, published June 2014). Whether you live, 
work or are a visitor to Woking, we want getting around to be easy while also 
contributing to and maintaining a cleaner, greener Borough. We hope that walking, 
cycling and public transport will be the first choice for short trips.  
 
The Borough offers a range of sustainable transport options. These are summarised 
here. Further detail is available in the full Strategy at 
www.woking.gov.uk/environment/climate   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Cycling and walking : Thanks to Cycle Woking , a 
partnership project between Woking Borough 
Council and Surrey County Council, a range of 
infrastructure and other improvements were made 
to enhance cycling and walking provision and their 
take-up in the Borough. For information on routes, 
check out 
www.cyclewoking.org.uk/getcycling/planettrails/pl
anettrails  or www.travelsmartsurrey.info/maps  
 
 
Car clubs  provide an innovative way of providing 
car hire to businesses and residents that is 
convenient, affordable and good for the 
environment. They offer short-term affordable 
access to a car, while positively contributing to the 
objective of a cleaner, greener environment by 
reducing the number of cars on the road. The 
local car club is provided by City Car Club. To join 
or find out more visit  
www.travelsmartsurrey.info/driving/car-clubs  and 
www.citycarclub.co.uk/   
 
PDF created with pdfFactory trial version www.pdffactory.com 
 
8 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Electric car charging : There are currently 14 
charging points across Woking Town Centre’s car 
parks. Parking charges apply as normal but users 
can charge their vehicles for free. Electric vehicle 
drivers also benefit from a 50% discount on car 
parking season tickets in town centre car parks.  
Find out more at 
www.woking.gov.uk/transport/parking/carparks/ch
argepoints   
Integrated travel network : Through Cycle 
Woking and TravelSMART, the Borough has 
benefitted from improvements to the local 
transport network to integrate and enhance 
sustainable modes of travel. As well as improving 
and installing cycle routes and parking, 
improvements have been made to bus services 
and routes, together with investments in 
interactive and live travel information, and 
improved  connectivity with rail travel.  Find out 
more at www.travelsmartsurrey.info   Smarter driving : According to the Energy Saving 
Trust, by driving smarter, the average UK driver 
could save up to £300 per year. Keep travel by 
car more efficient by trying out some smarter 
driving tips: switching off your engine if stationary 
for more than a minute or two, shifting to a higher 
gear as soon as you can as this uses less fuel, 
and keeping tyres correctly inflated. Find out more 
at  
www.energysavingtrust.org.uk/domestic/drive -
smarter   
 
 Differential parking charges : To encourage lower 
emission vehicles, the Council offers differential 
parking charges on season tickets for its town centre 
car parks. The cost of a season ticket is based on a 
vehicle's CO ² emission rating (determined by the 
Vehicle Certification Agency). A 50% discount is 
applied for vehicles that produce the lowest 
emissions (Band A) and a 25% discount for Band B 
vehicles. Those with a Band G rating (the highest 
band) pay a 25% surcharge. Find out more at 
www.woking.gov.uk/transport/parking/season   
PDF created with pdfFactory trial version www.pdffactory.com 
 
9 
 
Theme 4: The great outdoors 
 
This theme promotes and celebrates our diverse countryside and urban 
environments.  
Nowhere in the urban area of the Borough is more than a mile from open 
countryside. In fact, the Borough comprises 1,600 hectares of diverse green spaces 
including parks, common land, green corridors, play facilities and more.  
This provides us with a great opportunity to enjoy and benefit from the use of the 
Borough’s green spaces for sport, recreation and 
social interaction and the benefits this can bring 
to health and well-being.  We also want to 
enhance accessibility to our natural habitats and 
wildlife while recognising the need to ensure 
biodiversity security and protection so that future 
generations can benefit.  
There are a range of opportunities and 
challenges to consider with regards to the urban 
and countryside environment. We want to 
balance these and ensure that the Borough 
copes with existing and future demands for green space and outdoor recreational 
facilities, the need to protect and secure our local wildlife and biodiversity, and the 
need to respond to issues such as changes in climate and developmental pressures. 
These are summarised below. Further detail is available in the full Strategy at 
www.woking.gov.uk/environment/climate   
 
Opportunities  Challenges  
Positive contribution to our sense of 
place and our quality of life.  Changes in climate may affect local plant 
and animal life.  
Positive effects on local economic vitality 
and tourism.  We may need to plant vegetation that is 
suitable for the predicted changes in 
seasonal weather characteristics e.g. 
drought tolerant species. 
 
Opportunity to enjoy a range of activities, 
sports, recreation and social 
interaction…all of which positively 
contribute to our health and well-being.  Air quality could be exacerbated by 
changes in climate and developmental / 
population pressures. It is essential that 
we monitor and manage our air quality to 
maintain a clean, healthy and safe 
environment. 
 
Woking Borough Council will be developing a Biodiversity and Green Infrastructure 
Action Plan with Woking Local Action 21 and partners to maintain and enhance 
green spaces and local biodiversity. The Plan will identify priorities and targets for 
local habitats and species and outline what action is required. It will emphasise the 
PDF created with pdfFactory trial version www.pdffactory.com 
 
10 
 importance of working in partnership to achieve these aims with organisations 
including Horsell Common Preservation Society, Surrey Wildlife Trust, Basingstoke 
Canal Authority, WWF and Woking Local Action 21. 
Further detail about the Borough’s green spaces is available in the full Strategy at 
www.woking.gov.uk/environment/climate  and in the Council’s biodiversity and green 
infrastructure strategy – Natural Woking – available at 
www.woking.gov.uk/environment/greeninf/naturalwoking   
 
  
PDF created with pdfFactory trial version www.pdffactory.com 
 
11 
 Theme 5: What the Council is doing 
This theme outlines how the Council can make a positive contribution to the vision for 
Woking 2050. We can play a key role in shaping the Borough’s future and in helping 
the community do the same. We can work to reduce the negative environmental 
factors that may threaten the vision; and recognise the opportunities to secure it.    
 
These roles are summarised below. Further detail is included in the full Woking 2050 
Strategy available here: www.woking.gov.uk/environment/climate    
 
Area  Activity  
Planning policy Encourage sustainable construction and development. 
Procurement Encourage sustainable procurement of goods and 
services used by the Council and its operations.  
Energy  Improve energy efficiency and reduce the energy 
consumption of the Council’s own estate and operations. 
Waste management Reduce and recycle the Council’s own waste. 
Enable the community to maximise the amount of 
household waste that can be diverted from landfill and 
recycled. 
Travel Promote sustainable transport modes for Council 
business and the community. 
Community resilience Build resilience against environmental factors which may 
affect our community such as flooding, drought, heatwave 
and wildfire.  
Community support  Work with partners to help the community to access 
services, support and grants that contribute to the Woking 
2050 vision. 
Learning  The Council can learn from other organisations and share 
experience using networks and partnerships. It can also 
promote opportunities for education and awareness 
raising that contribute to the Woking 2050 vision. 
Green spaces / 
infrastructure Protect and enhance green spaces, habitats and wildlife. 
Maintain and enhance access to green spaces for sport, 
recreation and promote the benefits this can bring to 
health and well-being.  
Maintain good air quality levels in the Borough. 
Partnership working Work with partners across a range of themes, actions and 
projects. 
   
 
  
PDF created with pdfFactory trial version www.pdffactory.com 
 
12 
 Conclusion 
 
Woking 2050 provides a framework to coordinate our efforts to create a sustainable 
Borough by reducing our impact on the environment. It sets out how the Council and 
the community can contribute to our sustainability goals. We hope that by working 
together we can positively influence the future of the Borough for generations to 
come.  
 
For further information check out the full Woking 2050 Strategy available at 
www.woking.gov.uk/environment/climate  which includes a range of suggested 
sources for further reading.  
 
Further information 
If you would like to find out more about Woking 2050 or any of the Council’s other 
environmental projects or strategies, visit www.woking.gov.uk/environment  or contact 
us by email at greeninfrastructure@woking.gov.uk    
 
Photo credits 
Front cover:  Middle right – Brookwood Country Park Meadow – Liz Freemont 
Landscape Architecture; Bottom left – Action Surrey; others - 
Woking Borough Council 
Page 4:  Utilities – Action Surrey; Jubilee Square - Woking Borough Council 
Page 5:  Birds - James Sellen; Bins and Hoe Valley - Woking Borough 
Council  
Page 6: Woking Borough Council 
Page 7:  Cycles - Woking Borough Council; Car club – TravelSmart 
Page 8: Woking Borough Council 
Page 9: Woking Borough Council  
 
 
PDF created with pdfFactory trial version www.pdffactory.com